[SECTION] title
Genetic and Photographic Detections Document Sierra Nevada Red Fox in the Northern Cascades of Oregon

[SECTION] abstract
The red fox (Vulpes vulpes) exhibits a high degree of ecological plasticity, but the indigenous Sierra Nevada red fox (SNRF; V. v. necator) belongs to an evolutionarily divergent complex of montane red foxes, apparently specialized to subalpine habitats. Mountain red foxes historically occurred among isolated sky islands of the major mountain ranges of the western U.S., with the SNRF occurring along the Pacific Crest of Oregon and California. Little is known about the current distribution and status of SNRF in Oregon, which complicates regulatory decisions and impedes conservation of the subspecies. We conducted a survey in the northern Oregon Cascade Range during 2012-2014 using baited ground-level camera stations and noninvasive genetic sampling. Our objectives were to document red fox occurrences in our study area and investigate their genetic affinities using mitochondrial DNA sequences to indicate maternal haplotype. We detected red foxes at 11 of 41 camera stations and collected DNA from 18 of 24 hair and scat samples. Twelve of the DNA samples were from red foxes, and all were mitochondrial haplotype A-19 (the most widespread of the indigenous SNRF haplotypes), consistent with native ancestry. Additional research will be needed to assess the nuclear genetic integrity of these putative SNRF, their genetic effective population sizes, and their genetic distinctiveness with respect to the California SNRF and the Rocky Mountain red fox, and to describe patterns of connectivity among these potentially isolated populations.

[SECTION] introduction
Globally, the red fox (Vulpes vulpes) exhibits a high degree of ecological plasticity and has the broadest geographic distribution of any terrestrial carnivore (Larivière andPasitschniak-Arts 1996, Cypher 2003). However, the North American red fox is phylogenetically divergent from its African and Eurasian counterparts and is strongly boreal in its habitat associations (Statham et al. 2014). North American red foxes can be further subdivided to include the phylogentically and ecologically distinct montane red foxes, which are thought to represent a lineage of subalpine specialists that became isolated from other red fox populations during the last ice age (Aubry et al. 2009). Historically, montane red foxes were distributed among sky islands of subalpine parklands and alpine meadows in the major mountain ranges of the western U.S. and include 3 recognized subspecies: Cascade red fox (V. v. cascadensis), Rocky Mountain red fox (V. v. macroura), and Sierra Nevada red fox (SNRF; V. v. necator). Given their apparent dependence on high-elevation montane environments, climate change could threaten montane red fox populations through habitat loss and changes in community structure (Perrine et al. 2010).
Montane red foxes in the Oregon Cascades were once included within the Cascade subspecies; however, they are phylogenetically closer to those occurring in the Sierra Nevada of California and, consequently, are currently classified as SNRF (Sacks et al. 2010). This classification is also consistent with biogeographic expectations, because the Columbia River would be expected to serve as a barrier between the SNRF (OR) and the Cascade subspecies (WA). Historically, the SNRF was present throughout high-elevation areas in the Cascade Range and Sierra Nevada in Oregon and California. During the 20th century, however, SNRF populations in California declined precipitously; currently, there are only two known populations with total numbers estimated to be < 50 individuals (Sacks et al. 2010, Statham et al. 2012a).
Little is known about the current distribution of montane red foxes in Oregon. During 2015, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service will determine whether to list the SNRF under the federal Endangered Species Act, potentially including decisions related to the SNRF in Oregon (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service 2011). Thus, there is an urgent need for reliable information on the current distribution and status of the SNRF in Oregon. As part of a broader 2-year noninvasive survey to collect data on forest carnivores in the northern Oregon Cascades (McFadden-Hiller andHiller 2014, McFadden-Hiller andHiller 2015), we report survey detections and genetic characteristics of noninvasively obtained samples of red fox from our study area to determine whether their mitochondrial haplotypes (matrilines) are indigenous or non-native.

[SECTION] study area
Our study was conducted in the Willamette (~ 6,900 km 2 ) and Deschutes (~ 7,300 km 2 ) National Forests in the northern Cascade Range of Oregon (Figure 1). Forests were dominated at lower elevations by Douglas-fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii) on the west slope of the Cascades, and ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) on the east slope. Higher elevations were characterized by Pacific silver fir (Abies amabilis), subalpine fir (A. lasiocarpa), mountain hemlock (Tsuga mertensiana), lodgepole pine (P. contorta), and alpine meadows. Santiam Pass (1,468 m in elevation), between the Mt. Jefferson and Mt. Washington Wilderness Areas, generally experiences snowfall during 10 months of each year, with a monthly peak of 262 cm of snow depth during March (Western Regional Climate Center 2013); snowfall and snow depth typically increase with increasing elevation in the study area. Average minimum (-6.9 °C) and maximum (22.8 °C) daily temperatures occur during January and July, respectively (Western Regional Climate Center 2013).

[SECTION] data collection and analysis
We collected data on red foxes during October 2012-May 2013 and October 2013-June 2014 using noninvasive survey methods, including camera stations and hair-snagging devices (Figura and Knox 2010), as part of a forest carnivore research project (McFadden-Hiller andHiller 2014, McFadden-Hiller andHiller 2015). We used motion-sensing cameras (e.g., Bushnell Trophy Cam HD, Overland Park, KS; Trail Watcher model 2035 and 2040, Monticello, GA) at ground-level stations baited with 5-20-kg of salvaged wildlife carcasses (e.g., deer [Odocoileus hemionus], beaver [Castor canadensis]). We also used a skunk-essence based lure (Gusto, Minnesota Trapline Products, Pennock, MN) as an attractant applied 2-3 m aboveground on trees near camera stations. Bait and equipment were transported by non-mechanical means (e.g., horse, human) within wilderness areas. We attempted to monitor camera stations every 2-6 weeks, depending on weather conditions, avalanche risk, and other factors. In addition to hair samples collected at camera stations, we conducted searches to collect scat samples near camera stations and in other areas with evidence of fox presence. Hair samples were collected using paper envelopes and scat samples were collected in vials that contained 95% ethyl alcohol.
Although nuclear DNA will ultimately be necessary to assign foxes with high confidence as indigenous, admixed, or non-native (e.g., Statham et al. 2012b), in the present study, we used mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) sequences, which indicated only the matriline or maternal haplotype. Nevertheless, a relatively large sample of historical and modern mtDNA haplotypes from the broader region (e.g., Washington Cascades, California Cascades and Sierra Nevada, Rocky Mountains) Northwest Science Notes: Sierra Nevada Red Fox in Oregon and from several western non-native red fox populations enabled us to determine whether the red foxes in our survey area had indigenous or non-native mtDNA haplotypes (Perrine et al. 2007;Aubry et al. 2009;Sacks et al. 2010Sacks et al. , 2011;;Statham et al. 2011Statham et al. , 2012a, b), b). We used primers and laboratory procedures described in detail in these previous papers to produce 354 bp of the cytochrome-b gene and 342 bp of the D-loop region, totaling 696 bp of mtDNA sequence that we compared to the results of previous studies.

[SECTION] results
We detected red foxes at 11 of 41 camera stations based on digital images (Figure 1). Camera stations with red fox detections ranged from 1,439 to 1,988 m ( = 1,702 m) in elevation, whereas the range in elevation of all camera stations was 586 to 1,988 m. We collected 11 hair and 13 scat samples and successfully obtained DNA from all but 5 hair samples. Twelve samples (2 from the same location) were from red foxes, 5 samples were from Pacific martens (Martes caurina), and 1 sample was from a coyote (Canis latrans). The red fox samples were collected at elevations ranging from 1,489 to 1,990 m, a range similar to detections from cameras. All red fox samples had the cytochrome-b and D-loop haplotype A-19, which is the most widespread of the montane red fox haplotypes (Aubry et al. 2009, Sacks et al. 2010). Conversely, A-19 has not been associated with fur-farm foxes and was only found once (a single individual) in a confirmed non-native population (Sacks et al. 2010(Sacks et al. , 2011;;Statham et al. 2011Statham et al. , 2012a)). At 4 camera stations, red foxes were detected with digital images and DNA samples, 7 with only digital images, and 1 with only DNA samples. Seven samples were collected in areas not associated with camera stations (Figure 1).

[SECTION] discussion
Scattered detections from remote cameras in Oregon over the past several years have documented the presence of red foxes at high elevations as far north as Mount Hood in the Mount Hood National Forest and as far south as Crater Lake National Park and Diamond Lake in the Umpqua National Forest (e.g., A. Dyck, Mount Hood National Forest, personal communication;Hansen et al. 2013). However, no contemporary genetic samples had been collected and analyzed in the Oregon Cascade Range prior to our study. The red foxes we sampled from a relatively small number of sites in the Oregon Cascade Range all possessed an indigenous matrilineal haplotype, suggesting that they were indigenous SNRF.
Numbers of historical samples from the Oregon Cascades archived in natural history collections are too few to rely on direct comparison of modern and historical genomes (Perrine et al. 2007, Sacks et al. 2010). Therefore, future investigation of the genetic integrity of these putative SNRF must rely on admixture analyses on moderate to large numbers of modern foxes, similarly to the approach used to investigate a hybrid zone between indigenous and non-native red foxes in California (Sacks et al. 2011). Nuclear genetic data will also be necessary to characterize the connectivity among potentially isolated populations, their genetic effective population sizes, and their genetic distinctiveness with respect to SNRF in California.
The occurrence of non-native red foxes in other parts of Oregon demonstrates the need to assess the genetic composition of these populations (Statham et al. 2012b). Greater sampling efforts conducted throughout the historical range of montane red foxes in Oregon will be needed to investigate the possibility of hybridization with non-native red foxes. Until further research is conducted to address such questions, the paucity of reliable information on their distribution and status will continue to impede the effective management and conservation of montane red foxes in the Oregon Cascades.

