[SECTION] title
Comparison of environmental DNA metabarcoding and conventional fish survey methods in a river system

[SECTION] abstract
Regular biological surveys are essential for informed management of freshwater ecosystems. However, current morphology-based biodiversity surveys can be invasive, time-consuming, and financially expensive. Recently, environmental DNA (eDNA) sequencing has been suggested as an alternative non-invasive, time-and costeffective biological survey tool. However, eDNA sequencing tools require experimental validation in natural ecosystems before confidence in their use can be assumed. In this study, we compare fish community data obtained via eDNA metabarcoding to that of conventional fyke netting within two complex and drought-prone river systems. We also compare different eDNA sampling strategies and genetic markers for detecting rare and threatened fish species. We were able to detect 100% of the fyke net caught-species from eDNA when appropriate sampling strategies were used, including threatened and invasive species. Specifically, we found that two 1 L water samples per site were insufficient for detecting less abundant taxa; however, five 1 L samples per site enabled a 100% detection rate. Further, sampling eDNA from the water column appeared to be more effective for detecting fish communities than eDNA from sediments. However, on a per site basis, community discrepancies existed between the two methods, highlighting the benefits and limitations of both approaches. We demonstrate that careful interpretation of eDNA data is crucial as bioinformatic identification of sequences, without logical inference or local knowledge, can lead to erroneous conclusions. We discuss these discrepancies and provide recommendations for fish eDNA metabarcoding surveys.

[SECTION] introduction
Between 1995 and 2010 southern Australia experienced a 'millennium' drought, desiccating many freshwater systems and severely impacting ecologically important native fish populations (Ellis et al., 2013;Wedderburn et al., 2014a). When the drought ended, several species such as Murray hardyhead (Craterocephalus fluviatilis, McCulloch 1912) were reintroduced following severe population collapse (Hammer et al., 2013;Bice et al., 2014). Despite these reintroductions, the recovery of many populations has been regarded as unsuccessful, possibly hampered by abundant alien species such as the piscivorous redfin perch (Perca fluviatilis, Linnaeus 1758) and common carp (Cyprinus carpio, Linnaeus 1758) (Wedderburn et al., 2014a(Wedderburn et al., , 2014b)).
To assess the recovery of these south Australian river systems, routine biological surveys are often carried out. Fish populations are usually assessed by methods involving capture and morphological identification (Hill et al., 2005). However, the invasive nature of capture-based methods can compromise animal health by increasing stress and predation risk (Rottmann et al., 1992;RIC, 1997), and some species may be excluded from surveys due to selectivity of equipment (Pidgeon, 2004) or a lack of distinguishable morphological features (Bertozzi et al., 2000). Further, due to often-limited equipment, personnel, and funding, netting surveys are usually restricted both spatially and temporally. An ongoing decrease in the number of local taxonomists may also hinder future morphology-based freshwater surveys (Hopkins and Frekleton, 2002).
High throughput sequencing of DNA present in environmental samples, such as water or sediment, provides a non-invasive means to rapidly identify multiple taxa without the need for morphological identification (Thomsen et al., 2012;Thomsen et al., 2011;Hajibabaei et al., 2011;Taberlet et al., 2012). Sequencing environmental DNA (eDNA) also enables identification of organisms that might not be detected using conventional techniques, such as cryptic, immature or juvenile taxa, providing a more complete picture of biodiversity. Further, the rapid nature of eDNA sample collection and processing, and the continually decreasing cost of sequencing (Mardis, 2011) makes this approach suitable for increasing spatial and temporal coverage of surveys.
Before multi-species eDNA sequencing (herein referred to as 'metabarcoding'; Taberlet et al., 2012) can be used for routine biodiversity surveys, an understanding of the various nuances associated with the method, and guidance as to how well eDNA data reflects actual biological communities, is needed. Previous studies in controlled aquatic settings, such as mesocosms (Kelly et al., 2014;Evans et al., 2016) and small ponds (Thomsen et al. 2011), have found that all of the taxa present can be detected from eDNA; however, it remains to be determined whether these conclusions can be extended to larger and more complex natural systems. Additionally, there is presently no consensus on experimental protocols such as most appropriate sample type (i.e. sediment or water), level of sampling effort required, or most suitable DNA marker (genetic loci). As most fish species prefer to inhabit different zones within an ecosystem (i.e. benthic species, reed-dwelling species, or pelagic species), it is reasonable to expect that benthic species may be more effectively detected from sediment samples and pelagic species from water column samples. Further, the successful detection of abundant species is likely to require less sampling effort compared with the detection of less abundant taxa (Kelly et al., 2014;Thompsen et al., 2012), but these hypotheses are yet to be formally tested. Further, despite a number of studies assessing the suitability of different genetic loci (Deagle et al., 2014;Ficetola et al., 2010;Riaz et al., 2011;Leray et al., 2013;Mya et al., 2015) consensus on an optimal fish DNA marker has yet to be reached.
The objective of this study was to establish an effective eDNA metabarcoding survey protocol for detecting diverse fish communities in a complex and ecologically-sensitive freshwater system: the River Murray in South Australia. Ongoing fyke net surveys in the River Murray, and other nearby river systems, provided an opportunity to validate and optimize a metabarcoding survey approach against morphological data. We compared the fish communities identified via fyke net surveys to those identified from concurrent metabarcoding surveys. A number of methodological variables were tested, such as the effect of sample media (sediment versus water), number of samples per site, and choice of DNA marker, as well as the effect of species abundance on eDNA detection success. The findings of this study will aid future eDNA metabarcoding survey designs and assist in the development of rapid, non-invasive survey methods for freshwater fish species.

[SECTION] site information and sample collection
Two freshwater systems in South Australia were assessed during this study. A preliminary survey took place in the North Para River (NPR), which was sampled at six sites along the river system in April 2013 (SM-1). Two weeks prior, fyke net surveys had been carried out at these sites by the Department of Environment, Water and Natural Resources (DEWNR). The second, more extensive survey location, the Lower River Murray Wetlands (LRMW), was sampled at nine sites fringing Lake Alexandrina during November 2013 and again in early March 2014 (SM-2). In this second location, fyke net surveys were carried out concurrent to the eDNA sampling to allow temporally direct comparisons of eDNA and fyke net data. In late March 2014, fyke net and eDNA metabarcoding surveys were performed at two additional LRMW sites (SM-2), thought to be inhabited by the threatened C. fluviatilis, to address questions that arose during the initial November and March surveys.

[SECTION] north para river survey
Both sediment and water samples were collected from six sites along the NPR to ascertain the best sample media for eDNA detection of fish species. Two 1 L water samples were collected per site, 3-5 m apart, in sterile bottles from 10 to 30 cm below the water surface and immediately placed on ice. For the sediment samples, three sediment cores (7 cm width) were taken per site, 3-5 m apart, at a depth between 30 and 70 cm, using sterile cores. The top 2 cm of sediment from each core was collected and stored in sterile 15 mL tubes on ice. All equipment was sterilized with bleach and ethanol prior to use. Samples were transported to the laboratory on ice, and stored at 4 °C until DNA extraction 16-24 h later.

[SECTION] river murray wetlands survey
In November 2013 and early March 2014, water samples were collected as described above from nine sites in the LRMW. Fyke net surveys were carried out concurrent to eDNA sampling by placing three nets (6 m single-leader, 5 mm half mesh) at each site immediately after water samples were taken. Fyke nets were located 10 m apart, perpendicular to the riverbank. Grids (50 mm mesh) were placed at the entrances of the nets to exclude turtles, but do not influence the capture of fishes (b 250 mm length; ~24 species) that inhabit the area (Wedderburn et al., 2014a). The fyke nets were retrieved 15-19 h later and all captured fish were identified to species and counted, except for one taxon (Hypseleotris spp., Gill 1863) where the genus includes several cryptic taxa and hybrids (Bertozzi et al., 2000).

[SECTION] additional lrmw sampling to detect threatened species
Two additional sites, thought to be inhabited by the rare and threatened C. fluviatilis, were sampled in late March 2014 to explore whether eDNA detection of rare species could be improved by increasing the number of water samples analyzed. Fyke nets were set as described above and five 1 L water samples were collected as described above.

[SECTION] dna extraction
For the sediment samples, DNA was extracted from 0.25 g of sediment using the MoBio PowerSoil DNA Isolation Kit (MoBio Laboratories Inc., Solana Beach, CA) according to the manufacturer's protocol. For the water samples, the entire 1 L of sample was vacuum filtered under sterile conditions through 47 mm, 0.45 μm pore size nitrocellulose membrane filters (Merck Millipore, Billerica, Massachusetts). Sterile filter cups and membranes were used for each water sample, with the membrane contact surface sterilized between samples by washing with distilled water, followed by 70% ethanol and flaming. After filtration, membrane filters were placed into 5 mL tubes with lysis buffer (C1) and garnet beads from the MoBio PowerSoil DNA Isolation kit. The 5 mL tubes were agitated at room temperature overnight on an orbital shaker at low speed to release DNA from the membrane. The following day, tubes were vortexed for 2 min, and the membrane filters were removed and discarded. The lysis buffer was transferred into MoBio kit screw-cap tubes, and the DNA extracted according to the manufacturer's protocol (from Step 6). Extraction blank controls were processed in parallel to assess potential background contamination from laboratory reagents. For the water samples, 1 L distilled water was filtered and extracted alongside the samples; for the sediment samples, 80 μL of DNA-free water was extracted along side the samples.
All DNA extracts were frozen at -20 °C until PCR amplification.

[SECTION] pcr and dna library preparation
DNA was PCR-amplified using two fusion primer sets: a vertebratespecific 12S ribosomal DNA (rDNA) primer pair (Riaz et al., 2011) and a fish-specific 16S rDNA primer pair (Table 1), both designed for sequencing on the Ion Torrent PGM (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA). The primer sets contained 7-basepair long sample-specific indexes to allow eDNA sequences from different samples to be distinguished. Extracts from the six NPR sites were initially amplified using only the 12S vertebrate-specific primer set, but following data analysis, 16S rDNA 'fish-specific' primers (modified from Deagle et al., 2009) were used to amplify extracts from three of the NPR sites to compare the two DNA markers. Both the vertebrate-specific 12S and fish-specific 16S markers were subsequently used for all LRMW extracts. All extracts (including extraction blanks) were PCR-amplified in triplicate reactions to minimize PCR bias (Polz and Cavanaugh, 1998). DNA extraction, PCR master-mix preparation, and addition of DNA to the PCR master-mix were carried out in separate rooms within dedicated, ultraviolet irradiated hoods.

[SECTION] pcr amplification
PCR reactions targeting the 12S vertebrate-specific genetic marker (Riaz et al., 2011) contained 1× Amplitaq Gold PCR buffer, 2.5% DMSO, 1 mM dNTPs, 2 mM MgCl 2 , 0.5 mM of each primer, 0.05 U/L of Amplitaq Gold, 2 μL extracted DNA template, and 9.2 μL of molecular grade H 2 O in a total volume of 20 μL. PCR reactions targeting the 16S fish-specific marker were prepared as 20 μL reactions, consisting of 1 × Amplitaq Gold PCR buffer, 0.2 μg/mL BSA, 1 mM dNTPs, 2 mM MgCl 2 , 0.5 μM of each primer, 0.05 U/L Amplitaq Gold, 2 μL of extracted DNA template, and 9.8 μL of molecular grade H 2 O. Cycling conditions for both markers consisted of initial denaturation at 95 °C for ten minutes, followed by 35 cycles of 95 °C for 15 s, 55 °C for 30 s, and 72 °C for 45 s, with a final extension at 72 °C for 5 min. PCR products were visualized by electrophoresis on 2% agarose gels.

[SECTION] dna library preparation
Triplicate PCR reactions were pooled and cleaned with Agencourt AMPure XP beads, (Beckman Coulter, Brea, CA, USA). Samples were quantified using fluorometric quantitation (Qubit 2.0, Life Technologies, CA, USA) and pooled to equimolar concentrations (1.2 μg/μL). The pooled DNA library was then quantified and sequenced on the Ion Torrent PGM using 316 chips and 200 bp chemistry. A total of 6 PGM chips were used: one chip per marker (16S and 12S) for the NPR preliminary study and LRMW November survey, and one chip for the LRMW March survey (both 16S and 12S combined), and one for the LRMW March 2014 additional sites (16S and 12S combined).

[SECTION] data processing
Sequences were split into multiple files according to the samplespecific indexes using a zero mismatch threshold, and primer and index sequences were trimmed from the reads (CUTADAPT v1.1; Martin, 2011). Only sequences greater than 80 bp and with a quality score N Q20 for more than 90% of the read were retained (FASTX-toolkit v0.0.13; http://hannonlab.cshl.edu/fastx_toolkit). The retained sequences were clustered to 97% similarity using UCLUST software (Edgar, 2010). All negative controls were sequenced and subjected to the same bioinformatic processes; however, following quality filtering and clustering, the negative controls failed to retain any usable sequences. BLASTn was used to assign taxonomy to clusters using the online NCBI nr/nt database, and results were filtered and viewed with MEGAN5 (Huson et al., 2011; software available from: wwwab.informatik.uni-tuebingen.de/software/megan). A minimum support of 20 sequences, a minimum bit score of 120, and matches within 2% sequence similarity of the top hit for each cluster were used in subsequent analyses, as these parameters produced communities that were logical (i.e. species known to occur in the area) and were validated against the fyke net communities. Sequence files are available on NCBI's sequence read archive (SRA) at BioProject ID: PRJNA293920, BioSample numbers: SAMNO4396390 through to SAMNO4396520. Information of raw sequence counts and data processing are given in supplementary file (SM-13).

[SECTION] data analyses
Sequence counts were imported into PRIMER 7 software (Clarke and Gorley, 2006) along with the species counts from the fyke nets. eDNA data was compared to the fyke net data in both a species richness (presence/absence) format, and also by comparing sequence counts and species abundance. Species and sequence abundance data was standardized to proportions of the total sample, and square root transformation was applied to weight the contributions of common and rare species in the multivariate representations. A Bray Curtis-based similarity measure was used for both abundance and presence/absence data. Analysis Of Similarities (ANOSIM) and RELATE tests were used to statistically compare the composition of taxa detected by fyke and eDNA methods, and visualized using nMDS plots. To compare the number of species detected per site by each method, a paired t-test was performed within SPSS (IBM Corporation, Armonk, NY, USA). To determine if increased sampling effort could improve detection of less abundant species, more intensive sampling (five 1 L samples per site) was carried out at two additional LRMW sites in March 2014. Each liter sample was processed and sequenced independently and the average number of taxa detected in each liter was reported. From this information the average number of taxa detected in each possible cumulative combination of one, two, three, and four liters, and finally the total number of taxa detected (five liters) were plotted.

[SECTION] effect of sample media on edna species assemblage
The total number of identified fish species was higher when eDNA was obtained from the water column (eight species) compared to sediment (three species), with three species common to both sample types (Fig. 1). Of the six NPR sites assessed, fish species were detected from water eDNA at four of the sites, whereas sediment samples only yielded fish DNA at two sites . The fyke net survey carried out two weeks prior to eDNA sampling identified a total of seven fish species from the six sites combined. Five of the seven fyke net-caught species were detected from the water eDNA (tench Tinca tinca Linneaus 1758, and eastern mosquitofish Gambusia holbrooki Girard 1859 were not detected), while only two of the seven species were detected in the sediment eDNA (P. fluviatilis and Mountain galaxias Galaxias olidus Gunther 1866). Three additional species not identified in the earlier fyke-net survey were detected using the eDNA approach (common carp Cyprinus carpio, black bream Acanthopagrus butcheri Munro 1949, and mosquitofish Gambusia affinis Baird and Girard 1853). All three additional species were detected in the water eDNA, and G. affinis was detected in both the sediment and water. The two species Acanthopagrus butcheri and G. affinis are not known to occur in the NPR. A. butcheri is a coastal species known to occur in marine and estuarine waters in South Australia (Gomon et al., 2008), and G. affinis is not known to occur in South Australia (Hammer and Walker, 2004). However, upon inspection the congeneric G. affinis and G. holbrooki were found to have identical sequences for the 12S marker used. Thus detections of G. affinis likely indicate the presence of G. holbrooki at these sites. Species habitat preference (i.e. benthic versus pelagic species) did not appear to affect eDNA detection success, as two of the three sediment eDNAassociated species were also detected in the water eDNA. Further, blue spot goby Pseudogobius olorum (Sauvage 1880) and flathead gudgeon Philypnodon grandiceps (Krefft 1864) are typically benthic species yet they were identified in the water eDNA but not in the sediment eDNA.
Based upon this data (and the greater ease of sample collection), only water samples were used for the subsequent LRMW eDNA surveys.

[SECTION] comparison of 12s and 16s genetic markers
Several NPR eDNA samples failed to yield any fish species, and many of the 12S sequences were identified as mammalian and avian (e.g. Trichosurus vulpeculacommon brushtail possum, Dorcopsis sp.wallaby, Pseudocheirus peregrinuscommon ringtail possum, Oryctolagus cuniculus -European rabbit, Anas platyrhynchos -Mallard, Chenonetta jubata -Australian wood duck, Gallinula chloropusmoor hen). We hypothesized that the non-specificity of the 12S vertebrate primers could lead to non-fish DNA sequences saturating the amplification process, preventing detection of rare fish taxa. To determine if a more specific marker would improve detection of fish eDNA, fishspecific 16S rDNA primers were tested with eDNA extracts from three NPR sites. Two fyke-net caught species not initially detected in the 12S eDNA data were identified by the 16S primers (G. holbrooki and T. tinca) (Fig. 2). When combined, the two genetic markers detected 100% of species identified within the fyke nets. However, the 16S primers failed to detect five species that were identified in the 12S sequence data.
Of these five undetected species, two did not have 16S reference sequences available on the NCBI database (P. olorum and A. butcheri), explaining their absence from the data. However, 16S marker reference sequences were available for the other three species (P. grandiceps, C. carpio, and goldfish Carassius auratus Linnaeus 1758). Although fewer taxa were detected across the three test sites with the 16S marker than the 12S marker (4 and 7 species, respectively), the combination of the two markers enabled all the fyke-caught species to be detected. As a result, both markers were used for the subsequent LRMW surveys.

[SECTION] comparison of fyke net and edna sequencing surveys
A total of 23 species were detected from the combined eDNA and fyke net LRMW surveys, with only 13 species commonly detected by both methods (Fig. 3 & SM-5). There was no significant difference between total species detected per site for the fyke and eDNA data (paired t-test: P = 0.730, df = 17, t-value = 0.35); however, multivariate statistical analysis revealed community differences between the two methods (PRIMER6 ANOSIM: 2-way crossed design collection method x month; R = 0.242, P b 0.01; SM-6).
The eDNA metabarcoding approach detected five additional species not detected during the fyke net surveys, including smallmouth hardyhead Atherinosoma microstoma (Gunther 1861) and flathead galaxias Galaxias rostratus (Klunzinger 1872). However, three of the species identified from eDNA data are not known to occur at these sites: orange chromide Etroplus maculatus (Bloch 1795), G. affinis (12S only), and mulloway Argyrosomus japonicas (Temminck and Schlegel 1844). Five species were detected within fyke nets but not in the eDNA data (Fig. 3a), and included unspecked hardyhead Craterocephalus stercusmuscarum fulvus (Gunther 1867), lagoon goby Tasmanogobius lasti (Hoese 1991), southern pygmy perch N. australis, Murray hardyhead C. fluviatilis and a single estuarine greenback flounder Rhombosolea tapirina (Gunther 1862). These species are typically present at low abundances (SM-9). Further, as no 16S reference sequences exist for C. fluviatilis or C. s. fulvus, these species can only be detected with the 12S primers (SM-7).
During the LRMW eDNA metabarcoding survey, differences were again observed between the two DNA markers. The 16S primers detected 11 species, while the 12S detected 13 species, and only six species were shared between data from both markers (Fig. 3b). The 16S marker detected 39% of the fyke net-caught taxa, and the 12S marker detected 67% of fyke net-caught taxa, with a total of 72% of fyke net-caught taxa detected when the two markers were combined (SM-7). As before, it was not possible to detect some taxa due to a lack of reference sequence data. At the time of writing, there are no 16S reference sequences on the NCBI database for C. fluviatilis, dwarf flathead gudgeon Philypnodon macrostomus (Krefft 1864), Hypseleotris spp., P. olorum and C. s. fulvus (SM-7). However, when considering only those for which reference sequence data are available there is no difference between the ability of the two markers to detect species, as the 12S primers were able to detect 69.2% of fyke net-caught species when 12S reference sequences were available, and the 16S primers were able to detect 68.4% of taxa when 16S reference sequences were available (SM-7). Further, the 16S primers were able to discriminate between closely related taxa, such as the congeneric Gambusia species, where the 12S primers did not.
The LRMW was sampled during two time periods (November and March). We found that eleven species were detected in both months, with both the fyke and eDNA methods (SM 8), suggesting that these species have relatively stable populations and are consistently present at the sites. In contrast, detection of four other species varied over time and between methods: N. australis and T. lasti were only detected in the November fyke net surveys, and A. microstoma was only detected by eDNA methods in November, possibly indicating either seasonal variation or greater stochasticity in detecting less abundant species (SM-8 & 9). Detection of other species was even more variable, for

[SECTION] increased sample number improves detection of rare species
The mean number of identified species increased when eDNA from additional water samples was obtained and analyzed (Fig. 4). Within the 16S dataset, no additional species were detected beyond analysis of three 1 L replicate samples; but this is likely to be a result of limited 16S reference sequences within online databases rather than the diversity of the site being well characterized. In contrast, more taxa were detected with each additional liter sample when using the 12S marker, demonstrating that two 1 L samples per site was not adequate for characterizing fish communities at these sites. When both markers were combined, an average of 17 (± 1.4) taxa was detected per site when five 1 L samples were assessed, whereas only 14.3 (± 1.3) taxa were identified when two 1 L samples were assessed. Overall, a total of 19 species were detected within the two additional sites when five 1 L samples were taken, while the fyke nets at the two sites only detected 13 species (SM-4 & 5). Using the five 1 L sampling approach, three additional rare taxa (C. fluviatilis, C. s. fulvus and T. lasti) were detected that were absent in the earlier LRMW eDNA data. Further, A. microstoma was again detected in the eDNA survey, but not in the fyke net data.
As less abundant taxa were more often detected when a higher number of samples per site wereanalyzed, we also examined potential correlations between sequence abundance and the number of individuals counted in the fyke nets at these two sites. Five species (N. erebi, G. maculatus, Australian smelt Retropinna semoni, congolli Pseudaphritis urvillii, and P. fluviatilis) were chosen, as these species were present within both the fyke net and eDNA data sets, and had both 12S and 16S reference sequences on the NCBI database. The number of individuals caught in fyke nets ranged from 1 to 114. For the 16S marker, a strong relationship was observed between fyke net and eDNA abundances at one site (site 25: R 2 = 0.97, P = 0.002 linear regression), but not the other (site 26: R 2 = 0.16, P = 0.502) (Fig. 5). For the 12S marker, a similar trend was observed but neither were significant (site 25: R 2 = 0.72, P = 0.166, site 26: R 2 = 0.000, P = 0.912 linear regression). Site 25 had a more evenly distributed diversity, while site 26 was dominated by G. maculatus, possibly skewing the relationship (fyke-net Evar-index: site 25 = 0.29; site-26 = 0.18). The 16S marker sequence counts more closely reflected the fyke net species counts (Site 25: R 2 = 0.97, site 26: R 2 = 0.16) compared with the 12S marker sequence counts (Site 25: R 2 = 0.72, site 26: R 2 = 0.00), which may be due to the fishspecific nature of the 16S marker primer set. To determine if eDNA metabarcoding data better reflects fyke net data when sequence-and species-counts are compared (as opposed to species richness data) we re-analyzed the data using both abundance information and species richness information. The fyke net and eDNA data were less similar (PRIMER6 ANOSIM: R = 0.399, P = 0.001; SM-12) when the abundance information was used, compared with when presence/absence data was used (ANOSIM: R = 0.242, P = 0.001; SM-6). This is likely because eDNA sequence abundances are subject to biases such as preferential amplification, and differences in animal biomass and/or gene copy number across species.

[SECTION] discussion
This study demonstrates the potential of eDNA metabarcoding for monitoring freshwater fish communities, including both rare and abundant taxa. When appropriate sampling methods and DNA markers are adopted, the high-throughput and rapid nature of eDNA metabarcoding, combined with exponentially decreasing costs, makes it a promising tool for the biomonitoring industry. However, this study highlights a number of limitations that need to be addressed before eDNA metabarcoding can be deemed a reliable tool for routine biodiversity surveys. Here, we discuss these limitations and provide recommendations based upon the findings of this and previous studies.

[SECTION] spurious identifications
A number of taxa identified from eDNA data in this study are unlikely to be physically present at the sampling sites. For example, A. butcheri and A. japonicas are local estuarine and marine species respectively, while E. maculatus and G. affinis are freshwater species not found in Australia. G. rostratus has also not been detected at these survey sites for over 100 years (Hammer et al., 2009). These spurious identifications are likely caused by a combination of factors. In some cases, questionable results are likely due to genetic similarities between closely related species. For example, G. affinis is identical to G. holbrooki at the 12S genetic region used in this study, but only G. holbrooki is known to inhabit Australian rivers. Similarly, G. rostratus has a 16S gene region identical to that of G. maculatus, which was morphologically identified in fyke nets at these sites. E. maculatus is also likely to be a bioinformatical misidentification, although introductions of aquarium species to freshwater systems via the aquarium trade are plausible (Padilla and Williams, 2004). Generating and using a local reference sequence database, containing only species known to-or likely to-occur at the study site, could avoid misidentifications of this type. Other spurious eDNA identifications may be due to transportation of eDNA by secondary vectors, such as predator feces, boats, wetland birds, and water currents (Merkes et al., 2014;Deiner and Altermatt, 2014). This may be the case for A. butcheri and A. japonicas that inhabit nearby estuaries and marine waters. Alternatively, juveniles of these marine species may be physically present at some sites. The short DNA fragments (~100 bp) used in this study could also be a hindrance to accurate species identifications. Longer fragments would increase the probability of accurate bioinformatic identifications and decrease the probability of sequencing highly degraded and damaged eDNA. Since this study was completed, more advanced sequencing chemistry has become available and longer eDNA fragments can now be sequenced. We recommend always using a relatively strict quality score threshold to reduce the incidence of damaged DNA in final datasets, and interpreting results with caution, applying biological knowledge to the data before reporting conclusions.

[SECTION] water edna better represents fish communities than sediment edna
We found that eDNA extracted from water samples generally yielded a greater number of species and more closely reflected the NPR fyke net communities compared with eDNA from sediments. Recent studies have found that eDNA can be preserved in sediments for longer periods of time, and that, gram for milliliter, sediments tend to contain more DNA compared to water (Turner et al., 2015). Differences between sediment and water eDNA in this study may be caused by sample volume bias introduced during DNA extraction (Deiner et al., 2015). Specifically, Turner et al. (2015) found fish eDNA was up to 1800 times more concentrated per gram of sediment compared to per milliliter water, but we processed 4000 times more water (1 L) compared to sediment (250 mg) per sample, as attempting to extract DNA from larger sediment volumes would create undesirable technical difficulties. The study by Turner et al. (2015) also used highly-targeted single-species qPCR-based methods rather than the multi-species metabarcoding approaches used in this study, which is likely to result in greater recovery of individual species' eDNA. Due to the greater ease of sampling large volumes of water compared with sediment, we  propose that water is the better media for obtaining contemporary biological community information from eDNA.

[SECTION] careful primer design and choice is critical
We found that using multiple genetic markers increased the probability of species detection, and in some cases, compensated for inadequacies associated with specific gene regions, supporting the findings of previous studies (Miya et al., 2015;Evans et al., 2016). For example, only when data for both the 12S and 16S markers were combined were all fyke net-caught taxa detected from eDNA. Before choosing a primer set three factors should be considered: the number of reference sequences available, primer PCR-bias, and the genetic resolution between taxa. This study found that using fish-specific 16S primers reduced the occurrence of non-target mammalian, reptilian and avian sequences in the dataset; however, the 16S marker had fewer NCBI reference sequences available for Australian fish fauna compared to the 12S DNA marker. The second consideration, primer bias, is caused when mismatches between the primer and template DNA leads to preferential PCR amplification of some DNA fragments over others. This bias will increase the chance of DNA from some species masking the DNA of other species, and potentially exclude some taxa from the dataset. Primer bias is generally unavoidable but can be minimized with careful marker design or selection (Suzuki and Giovannoni, 1996). Finally, the genetic resolution between all target species can be investigated in silico with software such as ecoPrimer (Riaz et al., 2011) or GENEIOUS (Kearse et al., 2012) prior to sampling to ensure that chosen markers provide sufficient taxonomic resolution without substantial primer bias. If the chosen genetic region is identical between closely related taxa (e.g. congeneric species), species differentiation will not be possible; however, if only one congener is known to occur in the sites of interest, then it may still be considered a sufficient marker.

[SECTION] a higher number of replicate samples is needed to detect rare taxa
We found that analyzing two 1 L samples was insufficient to fully characterize fish communities at LRMW sites. Increasing the number of replicate 1 L samples, from two to five per site, increased the number of taxa detected and enabled 100% of the fyke net-caught taxa to be identified. A previous eDNA metabarcoding study that measured fish taxa in a controlled marine mesocosm found that diversity was higher and more representative of the true diversity when three 1 L samples were assessed compared with one 15 L sample (Kelly et al., 2014). This is likely because DNA from rare taxa is at relatively low concentrations and more sparsely distributed within the water column compared to that from more abundant species. Therefore, in this study we opted to measure the effectiveness of increasing the multiple spatial replicates rather than increasing the volume of the samples. Increasing sampling effort in this way increases the chance of detecting DNA fragments from taxa that are patchily distributed throughout the environment due to either low abundance or behavioral factors, such as shoaling. Ultimately, the sampling effort needed will depend on the target species biomass, behaviors, and population density. We have demonstrated the importance of adequate sampling design for detecting rarer species. Currently, the Cytochrome Oxidase subunit 1 (CO1) and the 12S marker gene regions are more widely used in fish DNA barcoding studies (Deagle et al., 2014;Hardy et al., 2011). However, previous studies have suggested that the COI does not contain suitably conserved regions for short amplicon-based eDNA applications (Deagle et al., 2014), and we found that the 16S locus was able to discriminate between some species where the 12S did not. The limited amount of reference sequences for alternative DNA markers, such as the 16S marker used in this study, highlights the need for extending genetic databases to include more gene regions, rather than relying on a few commonly used regions that may not be suitable for the target community (Deagle et al., 2014;Clarke et al., 2014). Unfortunately, we could not generate these particular reference genomes during this study due to financial restrictions, but greater future investment in exploring alternative gene regions, should be a priority.

[SECTION] does survey timing matter?
We found significant differences between the LRMW fish communities in November and March, and the month of collection had a significant impact on the relationship between the eDNA and fyke net data. In November no significant difference was observed between the two survey methods, whereas in March the two methods detected significantly different communities. The ability of eDNA metabarcoding to detect taxa at all life stages (e.g. egg, larval, adult), compared to net-based approaches that only detect fish above a given size, may partially explain the temporal differences between the survey method correlations. These factors need to be taken into consideration when interpreting eDNA-based survey data, as detection does not indicate mature individuals.

[SECTION] does sequence abundance correlate with taxa abundance?
We found some evidence of a positive relationship between species abundance in fyke nets and DNA sequence counts for several species. Sequence abundance reflected the number of individuals caught in fyke nets reasonably well at one site but not another, and for one genetic marker but not another. Many factors can affect sequence count (Deagle et al., 2013;Evans et al., 2016;Takahara et al., 2015), including DNA extraction method, sample storage, PCR bias, preferential amplification, spatial biases, cell integrity, gene copy number, and sequencing error. We suspect that community composition may also play a role, as we identified a stronger relationship between the two methods when data from the site with more even diversity was considered. We also found that amplification of a more targeted locus (fish-specific 16S marker) strengthened the relationship between sequence read-and species-abundance. However, more research is needed before species abundance can be reliably estimated from eDNA metabarcoding surveys, as the relationship between eDNA and fyke net data was weaker when sequence abundance data was used compared with when species richness data was used. We suggest that the first step in developing semi-quantitative eDNA metabarcoding methods is to first identify an effective group-specific genetic marker for the suite of target taxa. Once a highly targeted marker is determined, the weighting of each factor that influences the relationship between sequence abundance and target taxa abundance can be assessed through careful experimental validation and mathematical models. Until then, species-specific qPCR-based eDNA approaches can provide reliable estimates of relative taxa abundance across multiple samples (Laramie et al., 2015;Spear et al., 2015;Sigsgaard et al., 2015), and could be used to complement metabarcoding approaches.

[SECTION] conclusion
This study addressed a number of key questions associated with using eDNA metabarcoding for biomonitoring freshwater fish communities, including appropriate sample type (sediment versus water), the number of replicates required, and appropriate genetic markers. We found that five 1 L water samples per site and the use of two complementary genetic loci successfully enabled detection of 100% of the fish taxa caught by conventional methods within ecologically important wetlands. However, this study also highlighted several methodological issues that need to be explored further. Environmental conditions, DNA transfer by vectors, and bioinformatic parameter choice may all contribute to inaccurate community data. Therefore, data should be interpreted cautiously, in light of the habitat and taxa likely to be present at the site. It must also be noted that eDNA metabarcoding cannot currently provide demographic information, such as sex, maturity, age, and abundance; but, genetic markers may be developed to do so in the future (e.g. Polanowski et al., 2014). Until then, it will be necessary to use complementary methods, such as fyke and seine netting, to obtain demographic information. However, we suggest that more spatially extensive eDNA metabarcoding surveys could be used to better inform fyke net placement, allowing traditional methods to be utilized in key areas and less frequently to reduce costs and physical damage to aquatic species and ecosystems. It is likely that eDNA metabarcoding will be a highly useful tool for non-invasive biological surveys and will become more widely used as the technique becomes more refined.

