[SECTION] title
Accuracy, precision, and cost-effectiveness of conventional dung density and fecal DNA based survey methods to estimate Asian elephant (Elephas maximus) population size and structure

[SECTION] abstract
Non-invasive DNA-based capture-mark-recapture (CMR) methods have been developed to estimate population size and other parameters and have the advantage that samples can be collected without the need to see or disturb the animals. There are, however, few comparisons of DNA-based CMR estimates of animal population size with estimates from non-genetic methods. We compared the results of a dung-density based survey of an Asian elephant (Elephas maximus) population with a simultaneous fecal DNAbased CMR survey of the same population. We found 545 dung-piles along 116 line transects, converted dung-pile density to elephant density using rates of defecation and dung disappearance, and derived a population estimate of 141 (95% CI = [95, 208]) elephants. We collected 267 fecal samples during three CMR sampling sessions: 215 (81%) yielded sufficient genotypic information for analysis and gave an estimated population size of 132 (95% CI = [120,149]) elephants, closely matching the estimate produced by the dung-density method but with greater precision. The DNA-based method also provided information on population structure. We conclude that DNA-based CMR methods provide more precise abundance estimates, and more data about population structure and dynamics, than dung density-based methods. Fecal DNA-based CMR methods also require less time in the field and can be used when dung density methods are impracticable. Finally, fecal DNA based CMR methods are now cheaper than dung density based methods when line transect survey costs are approximately equal to CMR survey costs and dung decay rate monitoring costs are greater than laboratory costs (which will usually be the case).

[SECTION] introduction
Monitoring animal population size, structure, and trend is an essential part of wildlife biology. However, such monitoring poses serious challenges when the animals of interest are difficult to detect because they are rare or elusive, live in concealing environments, or are sensitive to disturbance. Fortunately, non-invasive DNA-based methods have been developed to estimate population size and other parameters and have the advantage that genetic samples (e.g. hairs or feces) can be collected relatively easily without the need to see or disturb the animals (Mills et al., 2000;Schwartz et al., 2007;Waits, 2004).
Since every individual (except identical twins) possesses a unique multilocus genotype, it is possible to determine the number of individuals sampled and, through the use of statistical models, to estimate population size. The approach most commonly used to analyze non-invasive DNA-based data is capture-mark-recapture (CMR). Nevertheless, use of non-invasive DNA-based methods can be problematic because of the low quantity and quality of DNA contained in such samples. Two main types of scoring error, allelic dropout and false alleles, can lead to incorrect genotypes and consequently to biased estimates (Smith et al., 2000;Taberlet et al., 1999). Fortunately, several methods have been proposed to counter these problems (Creel et al., 2003;Lukacs, 2005;Lukacs and Burnham, 2005;Mills et al., 2000;Paetkau, 2003). For example, Lukacs (2005) and Lukacs and Burnham (2005) developed a method which allows abundance to be properly estimated in the presence of genotyping error, estimating this error using the disproportionate number of genotypes only observed once relative to genotypes recorded more than once. This method represents a significant advance because it avoids the need to debate whether genotyping error is problematic in DNA-based estimates of abundance (McKelvey and Schwartz, 2004;Paetkau, 2004).
CMR methods provide estimates of animal abundance, not density. To estimate animal density from the estimates of abundance, one has to establish the area that was effectively sampled during the survey: previously this posed a significant challenge, but the development of spatially-explicit CMR models appears to have resolved these difficulties (Efford, 2004;Royle et al., 2009).
Despite the advances described above, very few studies have compared population size estimates derived from non-invasive genetic methods with those from other independent methods to assess reliability, accuracy, and cost-effectiveness. The use of dungcount survey methods to assess elephant population size is well established (Barnes, 1996;Hedges and Lawson, 2006). We therefore compared the outcomes and costs of a dung-count survey of an Asian elephant (Elephas maximus) population with a simultaneous fecal DNA-based CMR survey of the same population.

[SECTION] study area
Our work was conducted in the Nakai-Nam Theun (NNT) National Protected Area (NPA; 3532 km 2 ) and adjoining areas, especially the Nakai Plateau, of Laos (Fig. 1). In and around the NNT NPA, elephants occur on the Nakai Plateau (1250 km 2 ) and range into the lower NNT NPA and the Nakai-Nam Theun-Phou Hin Poun (NNT-PHP) Corridor (738 km 2 ) that links the NNT NPA with the Phou Hin Poun NPA. The NNT NPA is dominated by dry broadleaved evergreen forest from 500-1800 m asl; the Nakai Plateau by a mosaic of pine/semi-evergreen forest, scrub, and cultivation at 500-600 m. Rainfall in the plateau area is highly seasonal, with a wet season between May and September and typical annual precipitation of c. 2400 mm.

[SECTION] dung-count based surveys
Dung count-based surveys were conducted to CITES Monitoring the Illegal Killing of Elephants (MIKE) Programme standards (Hedges and Lawson, 2006). From September 2004 to August 2005, we conducted a pilot survey to estimate dung-pile encounter rates using 'recce transects', in which teams walked on a compass bearing counting all dung-piles seen but without measuring the distance from the survey line to the dung-pile (Walsh and White, 1999). These pilot survey data were used to define two strata (low-and high-density) within the line transect survey area (Fig. 1). From 17 February to 6 May 2006, we used line transect methods to determine elephant dung-pile density (Buckland et al., 2001;Hedges and Lawson, 2006). The 1.5 km long transects were arranged in clusters along short baselines, with the clusters randomly located within strata and the line transects perpendicular to the Nam Theun river; there were 13 clusters in the high-density stratum and five clusters in the low-density stratum, and each cluster had eight line transects (Fig. 2).
Estimating elephant density from the dung-pile density requires data on rates of elephant defecation and dung-pile decay. Following Hedges and Lawson (2006), we used a mean defecation rate of 18.07 defecations per 24 h with standard error 0.0698; these data were derived from a study of free-ranging elephants in Indonesia (Hedges et al., 2005). We calculated dung decay rate using the method of Laing et al., (2003), which entails locating cohorts of fresh dung-piles prior to the line transect survey and then revisiting the marked dung-piles half-way through the line transect survey to establish whether they have decayed. We used logistic regression to characterize the probability of decay as a function of time, and estimated the mean time to decay from this function. We analyzed transect data using the program Distance (Thomas et al., 2010), which integrates information from the three parameters of interest (dung density, defecation rate, dung decay rate). Following Barnes (2001), we used PCCL, the ratio of the confidence limit (CL) to the estimate (N), expressed as a percentage (i.e. PCCL = (CL/N) Â 100) as a measure of precision.

[SECTION] fecal dna-based cmr surveys
From 16 September 2004 to 3 March 2005, we conducted a pilot survey to (1) assess whether fresh dung-piles could be found in adequate numbers; (2) determine whether sample preservation techniques were appropriate; (3) select loci likely to be informative for this population; and (4) help us design the CMR survey.
The  (Hedges and Lawson, 2006), we aimed to maximize capture rates by focusing on areas in which elephants are likely to be found ('hotspots' such as salt licks and waterholes) while also spacing sample collection so that every elephant's home range would contain at least 2-3 collection locations. Hedges and Lawson (2006) note that the distance between sample collection locations must be small if home ranges are expected to be small; if home ranges are large, the distance between sample collection locations can also be relatively large. For CMR sampling of tiger (Panthera tigris) populations using camera traps, Karanth and Nichols (2002) suggest deploying camera traps (which can be thought of as sample collection sites) 5-10 km apart for tigers with home ranges of 200-500 km 2 ; these broad guidelines are also appropriate for forest elephants -indeed, they are likely to be conservative as many elephant's home ranges will be larger (Hedges and Lawson, 2006). We identified 16 sample-collection blocks, each 2-8 km 2 (Fig. 2) and containing one or more 'hotspots' none of which were more than 10 km apart, with no part of the study area >10 km from a 'hotspot'. Thus, the study design provided full spatial coverage of the survey area in each sampling occasion, ensuring exposure of all elephants present to potential 'captures' and (2) equivalent areas of the Nakai Plateau were covered by both the fecal DNAand dung-count-based survey methods. Blocks were sampled at approximately 4-week intervals. All dung-piles sampled were destroyed afterwards to prevent accidental re-sampling. For each sample, approximately 10 g of dung was placed in a 40 ml polypropylene tube, boiled for 15 min, and preserved in Queen's College Buffer [20% DMSO, 100 mM Tris pH 7.5, 0.25 M EDTA, saturated with NaCl]. Samples were stored in the dark at room temperature before shipment to the laboratory under USDA permit number 48529.

[SECTION] determination of population age structure
Elephant size (a proxy for age) can be estimated from dung bolus size (e.g. Jachmann and Bell, 1984;Reilly, 2002;Tyson et al., 2002). Following Tyson et al. (2002), for each dung-pile sampled during the CMR survey, we measured (to the nearest cm) the maximum circumferences of the three largest intact boli, or all intact boli if <3 were present, and calculated a mean circumference. We then assigned age classes thus: mean circumference 6 30 cm = neonate/juvenile; 30 cm < mean circumference 6 42 cm = sub-adult; mean circumference > 42 cm = adult.

[SECTION] laboratory protocols
Total genomic DNA was extracted using the guanidine thiocyanate/silica protocol of Eggert et al. (2005). Simple tandem repeat, or microsatellite, loci were used to distinguish individuals by genotype and to estimate the level of genetic variability. We used several loci designed for the African elephant (Loxodonta africana), as well as nine dinucleotide loci characterized in the Asian elephant (Kongrit et al., 2008): EMU04, EMU07, EMU10, EMU12, EMU14, EMU15, EMU17, and EMU23. In addition, primers were redesigned for FH94 (Eggert et al., 2008), an African elephant locus that was found to be polymorphic in Asian elephants.
To test the power of these markers to distinguish individuals, genotyping results from the first subset of samples were analyzed using the Prob-id5 program (Waits et al., 2001). This program computes P(ID)random, the power to differentiate between randomly chosen individuals, as well as a more conservative measure, P(ID)sib, the power to differentiate between siblings. The results of the more conservative test were used to test the power of the loci used in this study (Waits et al., 2001).
Genotyping and genetic sexing methods are outlined in Ahlering et al. (2011). Final genotypes that contained at least six loci were retained in the study, while those with five or fewer were not included in the CMR analysis. Although these samples might have represented recaptures or unique individuals, the results of the P(ID)sib test indicated that with only five loci scored, there was a 0.007 probability that two siblings would be misidentified as the same individual, and with only four loci scored, that probability increased to 0.017. The best way to avoid this 'shadow effect', in which different individuals with similar genotypes are mistakenly counted as a single individual (Mills et al., 2000), is to genotype a sufficient number of highly polymorphic loci for all individuals in the study.
Genotypes were compared in Microsatellite Toolkit (Park, 2001) to identify those that differed at four or fewer alleles: each of these genotypes were rechecked for accuracy. We considered samples that differed at two or fewer alleles but matched in sex and had very similar bolus circumferences to be the same individual (Ahlering et al., 2011). Including erroneous genotypes as captures in the CMR analysis could have positively biased the estimate of population size (Creel et al., 2003).
Genotypes for the individuals detected were analyzed in Gene-Pop 3.1c (Raymond and Rousset, 1995) for departures from expectations under Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium and for linkage disequilibrium. We then compiled capture histories for each unique genotype, which were analyzed using the program CAPTURE (Otis et al., 1978). Once again, we used PCCL as a measure of the precision of the resulting estimates.

[SECTION] dung decay rate estimation
A total of 1051 dung-piles were found throughout the study area, and monitored from September 2004 to March 2006. Logistic regression indicated a mean time to decay of 150.28 days (se = 2.77).

[SECTION] line transect-based survey
During the line transect-based survey, we found a total of 545 elephant dung-piles along 116 transects with total length 183.45 km in the high density stratum, but only one dung-pile along 56.63 km in the low density stratum (Fig. 1). Elephants appeared to be restricted to the high-density stratum and so a density estimate was not calculated for the low-density stratum. Moreover, our data (especially from the recce-and line-transects) and other data (Boonratana, 2000;Johnson and Johnston, 2007;Khounboline, 2002) indicated that our high-density stratum encompassed the entire dry season range of the Nakai elephant population. Applying a mean defecation rate of 18.07 (se = 0.0698) defecations per 24-h, we estimated elephant population density as 0.142 elephants/km 2 for the high-density stratum and population size as 141 (95% CI = [95,208]) elephants in the 989 km 2 this represented.

[SECTION] fecal dna-based survey and population structure
Because of the short survey duration (70 days), we could reasonably assume demographic closure (Karanth and Nichols, 1998). As already noted, our data (especially from the recce-and line-transects) plus others' data (Boonratana, 2000;Johnson and Johnston, 2007;Khounboline, 2002) all indicate that our high-density stratum survey area encompassed the entire dry season range of the Nakai elephant population, so we could also assume geographic closure. We analyzed 267 dung samples, of which 215 (81%) yielded sufficient genotypic information for analysis. However, only 19 samples were found in the third sampling session, so for the CMR analyses we treated these as extra-study samples and restricted the primary sampling period to the first two sessions, further strengthening the assumption of population closure. Within these two sampling sessions, 94 unique genotypes were detected; a further eight unique genotypes were detected during the extra study sessions. Of the recaptures, 27 were duplicate captures during the first session, 60 more were duplicate recaptures of the same individuals in the second session, and five were recaptures during the extra-study sessions. Thus, the CMR analysis was performed using 94 genotypes (40 in session one plus 54 in session two), with 20 of the individuals detected in the first session having been recaptured in the second session.
Population size estimation using model M(h) in CAPTURE suggests that there were 132 (se = 7.55; 95% CI = [120,149]) elephants in the Nakai Plateau population. There were an additional eight individuals detected in the extra-survey samples; these are included in the analysis of sex ratio and age structure (Tables 1 and2).
The 94 individuals identified comprised 27 males and 67 females, 17 (18%) juveniles, 29 (31%) sub-adults, 37 (39%) adults, and 11 (12%) undetermined (Tables 1 and2).

[SECTION] precision
Our dung survey estimate of 141 (95% CI = [95,208]) elephants yields a PCCL of 80.14% and our DNA CMR estimate of 132 (95% CI = [120,149]) elephants yields a PCCL of 21.97%.

[SECTION] costs incurred
Table 3 shows the costs incurred in conducting the two surveys and the estimated costs of repeating them at 2011 rates. The costs of the line transect survey comprise maintaining staff in the field to monitor dung decay rate prior to the line transect survey, and to conduct the line transect survey itself, and the necessary equipment. The costs associated with a fecal DNA CMR survey comprise maintaining sample collection teams in the field, field equipment, and laboratory analyses.

[SECTION] estimation of abundance from the two surveys
Our surveys were the first in mainland Southeast Asia to be conducted to MIKE standards. We estimated the size of the Nakai population as 141 (95% CI = [95, 208]) elephants using the dung count method and 132 (95% CI = [120,149]) elephants using the DNAbased CMR method. Although the two point estimates are similar, the DNA-based survey provided a much greater precision (PCCL 21.97% vs. 80.14%), at lower cost, more rapidly, and with additional information on population structure.
It is not possible to assess the accuracy of our population estimates, since the actual size of the surveyed elephant population is unknown. However, since (1) our simultaneously-conducted surveys returned two very similar estimates of the size of the Nakai elephant population with the confidence interval of the more precise CMR estimate contained completely within the confidence interval of the dung density based estimate and (2) the methods used have no assumptions in common and were conducted according to internationally-agreed standards for best practice (Hedges and Lawson, 2006), it seems likely that the survey results reflect the true abundance of elephants in the Nakai population.
The precision of our DNA-based survey compared well with that of other elephant surveys reviewed by Barnes (2001): for surveys returning an estimate of <1000 elephants median PCCL was 113% for aerial sample surveys (n = 38) and 45% for dung density surveys (n = 9). The relatively poor precision of our dung density based estimate probably reflects the very small population size, and the contribution of variance in three parameters -dung density, dung decay rate, and defecation rate (Plumptre, 2000).
We were only able to use the first two secondary sampling periods of the CMR survey because too few fresh dung piles were found in the third period. Although we were able to produce a population estimate using a CMR analysis, it is desirable to have at least five secondary sampling periods to facilitate the use of more refined models for data analysis (Otis et al., 1978;Williams et al., 2002).

[SECTION] comparison with photographic cmr methods
CMR methods are well developed with a solid statistical underpinning (Otis et al., 1978;Williams et al., 2002), and photographic CMR methods have become a standard tool for estimating the size and dynamics of animal populations (Karanth and Nichols, 1998;  Silver et al., 2004;Soisalo and Cavalcanti, 2006), including elephants (Goswami et al., 2007;Morley and van Aarde, 2007). However, CMR methods using either camera-traps or direct-sightings do not work for species in which individuals cannot easily be uniquely identified, and can be undermined by low detection rates where animals are wary or live at low densities. Camera trap-based CMR methods also require large numbers of camera traps, which are vulnerable to theft, damage, and high humidity (Mondol et al., 2009).

[SECTION] other evaluations of fecal dna-based cmr methods
There have been very few direct comparisons of the results of fecal DNA based CMR surveys and other independent surveys of the same population. For a review see Waits (2004); for specific examples involving coyotes (Canis latrans) see Kohn et al., (1999), for badgers (Meles meles) see Frantz et al., (2003), and for tigers see Mondol et al., (2009). In addition, Creel et al. (2003) used a wolf (Canis lupus) population of known size (41) to assess the impact of genotyping error on population size estimates from a census based on genetic analysis of feces and were able to tally 39 individuals (i.e. within 5% of the true population size). However, while this is obviously encouraging the study was not designed to assess the relative merits of non-invasive genetic and other survey methods, and did not use the CMR based methods which are likely to be preferred for most non-invasive population monitoring applications. Eggert et al. (2003) compared two genetic methods (rarefaction analysis and CMR) with a dung density based method to estimate the size of a population of African elephants, and while the results were encouragingly similar the dung count was not conducted simultaneously with the genetic sampling and the genetic sampling design was acknowledged to be suboptimal. Nevertheless, despite the cautionary remarks about the last two examples, it is clear that there are a growing number of fecal DNA-based CMR studies -including this one -which demonstrate that the combination of appropriate study design, rigorous sample collection and handling techniques, and the application of error-detection protocols produce accurate and precise population estimates.

[SECTION] advantages of fecal dna-based cmr methods for population estimation and monitoring relative to dung density-based methods
The methods evaluated here -dung counts using line transects and fecal DNA-based CMR surveys -are those typically recommended for estimating population size for elephants in forested areas (Hedges and Lawson, 2006) and are also appropriate for other species, such as ungulates and macropods. Dung density surveys are primarily suitable for relatively small areas because, before each survey can be conducted, a survey-specific dung decay rate needs to be estimated by monitoring a spatially representative sample of fresh dung piles across the survey area for long-enough that >90% of the first cohort of dung piles will have decayed by the time of the transect survey. This estimation is logistically challenging and time-consuming (e.g. P6 months in this study) but is vital because dung decay rates vary substantially in space and time, and using unrepresentative estimates would introduce biases of unknown magnitude (Hedges, 2012a;Hedges and Lawson, 2006;Kuehl et al., 2007;Laing et al., 2003). Elephant survey work in Asia has shown that such methods are feasible for survey areas of up to c. 5000 km 2 (Hedges, 2012b). For larger areas, the logistic challenges and cost become prohibitive; indeed, they are daunting even for considerably smaller areas. By contrast, fecal DNA-based CMR methods like those used in this study are much easier to implement because sample collection can focus on areas in which elephants (or other species) are likely to be found. Thus, DNA CMR methods can be used when estimating animal population size from dung density is not feasible. Moreover, the DNA CMR methods are quicker to implement than dung density-based methods. Indeed, CMR surveys should be completed as quickly as possible (typically over a 63-month period) to minimize the impacts of births, deaths, immigration, and emigration on the population estimate.
Our finding that the DNA CMR method provided a more precise estimate than the dung density methods is unsurprising, because the latter integrates estimates of dung density, dung decay rate, and detection rate, and the last two parameters are often highly variable (Hedges, 2012a;Kuehl et al., 2007;Plumptre, 2000). In addition, the DNA CMR method is expected to be, in general, more accurate because it avoids the problems of estimating a representative survey-specific dung decay rate: i.e. the difficulty of finding spatially representative samples of fresh dung piles across even relatively small survey areas (<5000 km 2 ) raises the possibility of using unrepresentative dung piles and thus inaccurate decay rates (Hedges, 2012a;Kuehl et al., 2007;Laing et al., 2003;Walsh and White, 2005).
Finally, the combination of genetic methods and CMR statistics provides researchers and wildlife managers with a much more informative means of monitoring populations than that provided by dung density-based methods since, in addition to population size, it becomes possible to assess population sex-structure, fecundity, genetic diversity, gene flow, and other parameters without needing to see an animal. Moreover, if the DNA CMR surveys are repeated it also becomes possible to study population dynamics, including survival and recruitment rates.

[SECTION] cost implications
The cost-effectiveness of a survey method is clearly an important consideration. Advances in sequencing technologies and the development of multiplex protocols have reduced the costs of genotyping fecal samples over the last decade (Beja-Pereira et al., 2009;Eggert pers obs.;Schwartz et al., 2007), but the perception remains that DNA-based methods are prohibitively expensive. It is therefore useful to compare the typical costs of conducting a DNA-based CMR and a dung density based survey. Let the cost of a DNA CMR survey be represented by C + L and the cost of a dung density-based survey be represented by D + T, where C = CMR field survey costs, L = laboratory costs, D = dung decay rate monitoring costs, and T = line transect field survey costs. In most cases, T % C, because a similar number of people is needed in the field for a similar length of time. Hence, the relative costs of DNA-based CMR and dung count-based methods can be assessed by comparing D with L. In this study, D and L were approximately equal in 2006 but L was significantly lower than D at 2011 rates (Table 3). More generally, D will often exceed L because the time needed to estimate dung decay can easily be 3-12 months depending on local conditions and significant manpower and other resources will always be required if dung decay rates are to be estimated in a spatially unbiased manner (Section 4.4).

[SECTION] application of dna-based cmr methods to surveys of large areas
Despite the strengths of fecal DNA-based methods, there are practical limitations which currently preclude their use for population surveys over very large areas such as those occupied by elephants in Central Africa or Southern India. For example, Lukacs and Burnham (2005, p. 3914) suggest that fecal DNA-based methods are only likely to be appropriate when elephant population size is smaller than 'a few thousand individuals', because otherwise a very large number of samples would have to be collected and analyzed making the cost prohibitive. So, how can we estimate and monitor elephant population size reliably in large forested landscapes containing large populations?
Recent advances in occupancy survey methods (Hines et al., 2010;Mackenzie et al., 2009;Nichols et al., 2008) and especially the integration of population estimation at two geographic scales -occupancy across large landscapes and abundance in selected areas within those landscapes (e.g. Conroy et al., 2008) -present what is probably the most reliable currently-available method for estimating the abundance of elephants (and other species) in large landscapes. Adapting the approach of Conroy et al. (2008) for use in estimating the abundance of elephants across a large landscape would involve, in a first phase, estimating occupancy from surveys to detect elephant sign (dung piles) in all selected sites in the landscape (where selection would be of all sites available (if possible), or a random sample of sites (if not)). In a second phase, if a detection threshold had been achieved in the first phase, fecal DNAbased CMR sampling would be conducted to estimate elephant abundance. Alternatively, following Conroy et al. (2008), in landscapes where the elephant population is likely to be highly overdispersed, CMR sampling would be conducted in a randomly selected set of sites (from which detection samples are also taken). In addition, population-size constraints might need to be applied to the definition of sites to keep population size per site below a few thousand elephants. Detection and CMR data would then be used in a joint likelihood approach to model probability of detection in the occupancy sample via an abundance-detection model. Capture-recapture modeling would then be used to estimate abundance for the abundance-detection relationship, which could be used to predict abundance at the remaining sites, where only detection data were collected. Practical evaluations of this approach are needed but it appears to be a promising way of extending the power of the DNA-based CMR methods demonstrated in this study to those very large areas for which there are currently no appropriate methods for estimating elephant abundance.

[SECTION] other constraints on the use of fecal dna-based methods
Fecal samples are not covered by CITES' restrictions but a number of countries do not allow the export of fecal samples for intellectual property related reasons. In such cases, the laboratory work would have to be done in country. Unfortunately, there are still relatively few laboratories able to analyze fecal DNA samples to the necessary standard and this can pose a significant constraint on the use of these methods. Nevertheless, the number of suitable laboratories is growing and the authors of this paper, the CITES MIKE programme's Technical Advisory Group, and the IUCN/SSC elephant specialist groups can provide advice on suitable laboratories.

[SECTION] conclusions
Our study shows that DNA-based CMR methods are likely to become the method of choice for monitoring elephant populations in forests, providing more precise estimates, more rapidly, and at lower cost than alternative methods. This approach also provides additional data on population structure, and offers the possibility of monitoring population processes if repeated over time. Although currently restricted to relatively small areas, integrating this method with an occupancy approach offers a potential means to monitor populations across very large landscapes. Hence, such methods are likely to contribute significantly to the management and conservation of elephants and other species.

