[SECTION] title
Dietary shift of White-cheeked Starlings Spodiopsar cineraceus living in Korean village groves around rice paddy elds

[SECTION] abstract
We investigated the feeding preferences of the White-cheeked Starling Spodiopsar cineraceus in Korean village groves during the breeding season by means of a fecal dietary analysis using a non-invasive molecular approach. A total of 529 fecal samples were collected from four different study sites, 113 of them (21.4% of all fecal samples) were identified as those of S. cineraceus. Analysis showed that the starling's diet mostly consisted of animal matter (64.5%), but also contained vegetable matter (32.7%). Terrestrial prey, such as insects and spiders, constituted the largest proportion (65.2%) of species in the diet, although aquatic organisms (26.1%) were also important. Most of the seeds detected in feces were of mulberries, with detection rates rising to 68.1% by the end of May and remaining high until mid-June. Our results suggest that higher water levels in paddy fields due to irrigation could potentially act as an impediment to bird feeding, particularly for small birds such as S. cineraceus and induce a dietary shift to terrestrial organisms from aquatic organisms. In addition, we suggest that human agricultural activities may influence the feeding activities of small bird species such as S. cineraceus in an agricultural ecosystem.

[SECTION] (no title)
Conserving biodiversity is one of the most important issues worldwide. Traditional cultivation regimes in agricultural ecosystems enhance biodiversity in many areas (Balmford et al. 2001;Hughes et al. 2002;Luetz & Bastein 2002). In particular, rice paddies as agricultural ecosystems are recognized as important wetland systems and serve as biodiversity nurseries (Kim et al. 2011). The importance of rice paddy fields as agricultural wetlands was formally emphasized at the 10th Ramsar Convention in Changwon, Korea (Kim et al. 2011).
Traditionally in Korea, village forests and groves were created and conserved in order to compensate topographically weak areas, these important habitats are known locally as Maeulsoop (pronounced má-ùl-soop) (Lee et al. 2007). Maeulsoop range in size from isolated old trees to groves of various tree types (coniferous, deciduous, mixed forest) and are closely associated with paddy fields in the Korean rural landscape. From an ecological perspective, maeulsoop play an important role in providing habitat for local wildlife. For example, various birds, especially cavity nesters, select trees in maeulsoop as breeding sites (Park et al. 2006). In addition, maeulsoop can serve as habitat corridors or stepping stones, increasing landscape connectivity in landscapes fragmented by human activities (Lee et al. 2007). Because landscape connectivity is such a crucial aspect of maintaining biodiversity, some studies have focused on their ecological roles in terms of landscape ecology (Turner 1989;Jordán et al. 2003;Koh 2011). However, few studies have been conducted on the trophic relationships of birds living in maeulsoop (Park & Lee 2010).
The White-cheeked Starling Spodiopsar cineraceus (hereafter referred to as starling (s)) is a suitable avian study species for facilitating an understanding of trophic relationships in an agricultural landscape. Starlings breed from early March to July, but particularly during April and May in Korea. Many starlings nest in large trees in maeulsoop and use two different habitats (forest and agricultural land) in which to forage during their breeding season (Park et al. 2006). During this same period, farmers irrigate their paddy fields for rice transplantation. Such agricultural activities affect avian foraging and and may influence the foraging preferences of starlings (Park et al. 2006). Therefore, monitoring the diet of starlings utilizing maeulsoop is important in understanding the impact of agricultural activities on birds.
Advances in molecular analysis have allowed the identification of dietary components retrieved from stomach contents or feces with great accuracy (Deagle et al. 2010). Furthermore, the construction of barcode libraries has helped in the identification of species based on very small samples including those of blood, muscle, and feathers (Yang et al. 2010;Waugh et al. 2011). Especially, the use of noninvasive sampling, such as the use of feces, avoids any ethical problems arising from previous methodologies (such as stomach content analysis after killing and dissecting, the use of neck-collars, or crop or stomach flushing) (Miller & McEwen 1995;Hull 1999;Exnerova et al. 2003;Moorman et al. 2007).
We investigated the feeding preferences of Whitecheeked Starlings inhabiting Korean village groves during the breeding season, and identified their dietary components by means of a non-invasive, molecular examination of their feces. In addition, we describe the relationship between human agricultural activities and the starling's diet shift.

[SECTION] 1) study site and sample collection
Our study sites were located around Mt. Mai in Jinan, in the middle part of South Korea (35°47′30″ N, 127°25′49″ E). Based on previous research (Joo & Park 2012), we selected four different maeulsoop as study sites: Wongusin (WGS), Jeungjwa (JJ), Yundong (YD) and Wonbanwol (WB), as they support many starlings. The study sites are mostly more than two kilometers apart, ensuring statistical independence among the study sites. Fecal samples were collected bi-weekly during the starling breeding season from May to early July 2012. During the first investigation, May 3 -5, none of the paddy fields at each site had been flooded. However, before the second investigation, May 16 -18, most paddy fields flooded for rice transplantation and thereafter retained as temporary wetlands until the end of the starling breeding season. Irrigation occurred during a very short period in our study sites. We prepared 24 m 2 (3.4 × 7 m) fecal collection traps using recycled polyester banners in order to collect fecal samples without contamination from soil. The traps were set beneath starling nests (n = 3 in WGS, n = 2 in JJ, n= 1 in YD and n = 2 in WB) and left in place overnight during the sampling periods. Fecal collection traps were also installed beneath starling roosts. Fecal samples were collected from the traps in the early morning, thus all had been excreted during the previous 24 hr. Fecal samples were placed in 2 ml Eppendorf tubes and frozen in liquid nitrogen in the field then transported to the laboratory for later analysis. The samples were stored at -80°C until extraction.

[SECTION] 2) dna preparation, polymerase chain reaction (pcr) amplification, and sequencing
Genomic DNA was extracted from feces using the QIAamp DNA Stool Mini Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer's protocol, except for the lysis step. We added one or two 5 mm stainless steel beads (Qiagen) to allow sufficient homogenization to occur during the lysis step and mixed by vortexing for 1 min or shaking using a Mixer Mill (Retsch, Haan, Germany) at 20 Hz for 1 min. To identify White-cheeked Starling feces, PCR amplifications were carried out using a birdspecific primer pair (K_Bird_F1 & R1) targeting the mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase subunit I (COI) region (Joo & Park 2012). The region amplified by the newly designed primer pair had a length of approximately 226 bp and was located in the middle of the full-length COI barcoding region. For dietary analysis from feces, we used a universal primer, Uni_Minibar_F1 & R1, designed for biodiversity analysis of eukaryotes after identifying starling feces (Meusnier et al. 2008). In each PCR amplification, 1 µl of extracted DNA was added to 24 µl of the amplification mixture, giving final concentrations of 1×Ex Taq Buffer, 1.5 mM of MgCl 2 , 10 mM of dNTP mix, 0.2 µM of each primer, 0.1 M of BSA, and 1 U of Ex Taq DNA polymerase (Takara, Shiga, Japan), in a final volume of 25 µl. PCR conditions were as follows: an initial denaturation at 95°C for 2 min, five cycles of denaturation at 95°C for 1 min; annealing at 46°C for 1 min; elongation at 72°C for 30 s, 45 cycles of denaturation at 95°C for 1 min; annealing at 53°C for 1 min; elongation at 72°C for 30 s, and a final extension step at 72°C for 5 min. After the reactions, the amplified PCR products were purified using an Expin TM Gel SV Kit (GeneAll, Seoul, Korea). The purified PCR products were inserted into the pGEM ® -T Easy Vector, according to the manufacturer's protocol (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) and transformed into DH5α chemically competent cells. The cells were plated in Luria-Bertani agar+ampicillin medium with 40 μl X-gal solution (2% w/v) for screening. After cloning, three to five white colonies were selected and amplified by colony PCR with the M13F&M13R primer. The PCR conditions were as follows: an initial denaturation at 95°C for 10 min, 35 cycles of denaturation at 94°C for 30 s; annealing at 55°C for 30 s; elongation at 72°C for 1 min; and a final extension step at 72°C for 7 min. After the reactions, the amplified PCR products were purified using an Expin TM PCR SV Kit (GeneAll, Seoul, Korea). Sequencing was conducted by a commercial sequencing service company (Macrogen, Seoul, Korea). Each sequence obtained was identified by BLASTN analysis in the GenBank database and the BOLD-identification system (IDS) online workbench provided by the BOLD website (www. boldsystems.org) (Ratnasingham & Hebert 2007).

[SECTION] 3) landscape analysis
To determine the relationship between land-cover availability and starling feeding patterns, the percentages of relative area according to land-use type were calculated from four different study sites in the landscape sector within a 500 m radius. Feare (1984) explained that Common Starling Sturnus vulgaris feeding nestlings mostly forage in boundary habitats within 500 m from their nest. Landscape analyses were conducted using Arc-GIS 9.3 (ESRI), based on a 2012 aerial photograph (downloaded from http:// air.ngii.go.kr).

[SECTION] 4) statistical analysis
The chi-square test was used to test for statistically significant differences in feeding preferences before and after irrigation. To reduce the approximation error, Pearson's chi-square test with Yate's continuity correction was selected. All statistical analyses were performed with R software (R Core Team 2013).

[SECTION] 1) number of collected fecal samples
A total of 529 fecal samples were collected from the WGS, JJ, YD and WB study sites during May, June and July (Fig. 1). The largest number (n = 53) of samples was collected from WB, and the greatest numbers of samples were collected from mid-May to mid-June at most sites. The highest number of fecal samples was collected at JJ in early May. Species identification based on a molecular approach indicated that 113 of the 529 samples (21.4% of all fecal samples) were from starlings (Fig. 1). The number of starling feces per trap increased at most study sites until the end of May then declined. Three fecal samples were lost during analysis thus the total number of samples available for further analysis was 110.

[SECTION] 2) prevalence of animal and vegetable diet in feces
Dietary analyses were conducted on starling feces identified by morphological and molecular methods. Seeds in feces were identified by morphological criteria based on Lee et al. (2009). Animal matter was significantly more prevalent (71 of 110 samples; 64.5%) in fecal samples than vegetable matter (36 of 110; 32.7%) during the entire period. Vegetable matter was either not detected, or only detected at low rates prior to mid-May, but increased to 68.1% by the end of May and remained high until mid -June, whereas the detection rate of animal matter in the diet was high ( > 58.1%) throughout the entire study period (Fig. 2). Most seeds detected in feces were identified as mulberries.

[SECTION] 3) classification of animal diet by habitat
Based on a BLASTN analysis, the animal matter identified in starling feces was categorized by habitat into three types: terrestrial, aquatic and unclassified (Table 1, Fig. 3). Of 110 starling fecal samples identified, 84 (76.4%) were successfully amplified by the Uni-Minibar_F1 & R1 primer pair to detect the diet species. Excluding sequencing errors, fungal and other bird sequences, 37 different operational taxonomic units (OTU) were detected and identified by BLASTN analysis (Table 1). Nine different prey species (spiders, flies, moths, cicadas, and grasshoppers) living in terrestrial regions were detected. Most sequences were identified to genus, or to the family level, and were highly similar ( > 90%) to registered cytochrome c oxidase subunit 1 (COI) sequences in GenBank. Eleven aquatic organisms OTUs were detected in starling feces (Table 1). Pond Loach Misgurnus mizolepis, and diving beetle Philaccolus sp. were identified to the species or genus levels. Rotifers and algae, although not eaten directly by starlings, were also detected in feces allowing us to assume that starlings had foraged in an aquatic habitat. Two OTUs, identified as Hemiptera sp. and Goera sp., could not be assigned to categories as they could only be identified to the Order level and because they exhibit habitat differences between larvae and adults. Based on the habitat categories, terrestrial species comprised the largest proportion, 65.2%, of the total number of species detected in the diet, whereas aquatic organisms accounted for only 26.1%. Aquatic organisms were detected at their highest rate, 75%, in early May, but thereafter their detection rate decreased, whereas terrestrial organ-  isms increased to 100% and retained a higher rate of detection in feces than did aquatic organisms (Fig. 3). A chi-square test showed significant differences in starling feeding preferences before and after irrigation (χ 2 = 39.9, 50.2, 72.0 and 116.8, P < 0.001 in all tests).

[SECTION] discussion
The primary goal of this study was to investigate the feeding preferences of White-cheeked Starlings inhabiting Korean village groves during the breeding season. Our results showed that the foraging prefer- ences of starlings changed during the breeding season; they preferred animal matter over vegetable matter during the early phase of the breeding period, but then consumed both animal and vegetable matter during the later part of the breeding season. Terrestrial organisms, such as insects, earthworms and spiders, represented the largest proportion (65.2%) of the diet, compared with aquatic organisms at just 26.1%. The proportion of aquatic organisms in the diet declined until the end of May after irrigation, whereas the detection rate of terrestrial organisms increased to 100%. We considered the possibility that irrigation might act as an impediment to starling feeding and may have induced their dietary shift from aquatic to terrestrial organisms.
The dietary shift detected in the White-cheeked Starling may have been related to temporal variation in food availability and to varying nutritional needs (e.g., during egg laying and raising chicks). A wide range of omnivorous bird species have very different diets during their spring/summer breeding season and autumn/winter; for example Wiens (1973) showed that both Horned Lark Eremophila alpestris and Lark Bunting Calamospiza melanocorys fed primarily on grasshoppers, weevils, and ants during the breeding season, but switched to a diet dominated by Compositae, Amaranthus spp., or grass seeds during fall and winter. In our study of the White-cheeked Starling, we found that starlings took both vegetable and animal matter while breeding, but their proportions in the diet varied considerably. The increase in the proportion of vegetable matter in the diet can be explained by an increase in the availability of mulberries in the forests and groves around the study sites. However, it is possible that adult starlings prefer to forage for animal matter during egg laying, molting, and chick rearing phases. Adult Lark Bunting, for example, select more acridids, dipterans, odonates, and spiders for their offspring than for themselves (Orians 1966;Wiens 1973). We assume that the preference of starlings for animal matter might help with protein uptake, which is essential for maturation and growth of nestlings during the breeding season.
Agricultural activities such as irrigation may affect avian foraging, particularly of those species that use paddy fields as feeding sites. Generally, paddy fields are temporary wetlands during the period when rice seedlings are transplanted. During that term, paddy fields are interconnected with irrigation ponds and rivers by means of extensive canal networks and provide substitute habitats for a wide range of wetland species such as fish and aquatic insects (Washitani 2007). In our study area, most paddy fields were flooded for transplantation in early May, which increased the proportion of paddy fields as temporary aquatic areas to 26.6% of the total area (Table 2 andFigs. 4, 5). In addition, previous studies have shown that increases in aquatic insects after irrigation and until after summer occur naturally because paddy fields become seasonal wetlands (Saijo 2001;Bambaradeniya & Amerasinghe 2003;Yamazaki et al. 2004). However, our results showed that despite increases in the abundance of potential prey in paddy fields, the proportion of aquatic organisms taken by starlings decreased during May, whereas the proportion of terrestrial organisms taken increased to 100% (Fig. 3). Rainwater puddles can be important habitats for aquatic organisms and small omnivorous birds such as starlings (mean body size, 24 cm) can also access paddy fields prior to irrigation (Lee et al. 2000). However, rising water levels in paddy fields resulting from irrigation may interfere with avian foraging and act as an impediment to feeding for small birds such as the starlings. White-cheeked Starlings feeding their nestlings mostly use boundary habitats for foraging within 500 m of their nests and paddy fields are a major (23.2% on average) land-use type in the total land-use composition within our study area. In addition, most terrestrial prey detected in this study were spiders, flies, moths, cicadas, and grasshoppers. It is difficult to determine whether these species increased rapidly during the starling breeding season; therefore, we have assumed that the dietary shift we observed resulted from changes in the paddy  field environment caused by irrigation.
The reproductive success of avian nestlings may be related to the availability of potential prey provided by adults (Martine 1995), and parent birds may fly longer distances to utilize suitable habitats when nearby landscapes are insufficient for foraging (Frey-Roos et al. 1995;Bruun & Smith 2003). Although flooded paddy fields may support temporary increases in prey abundance such as aquatic insects and fishes, it may be difficult for starlings to use irrigated rice fields as foraging habitats because of their higher water levels. This may result in parents increasing their flight distances and this raising their energetic costs (Bruun & Smith 2003).
Understanding the trophic relationships among living organisms is essential when attempting to explain the ecological importance of the maeulsoop-related agricultural landscape. Our results show that Whitecheeked Starlings living in maeulsoop undergo a dietary shift during the breeding season. Human agricultural activities may significantly affect the foraging behavior of small bird species such as starlings in agricultural ecosystems. To clarify how such agricultural activities affect avian foraging, it is necessary to investigate changes in the feeding preferences of other bird species using paddies as feeding sites. In addition, applying our molecular strategy using avian feces is a convenient and non-invasive way to conduct avian dietary analyses and to help understand avian trophic relationships.

