[SECTION] title
SEE PROFILE

[SECTION] abstract
Identification of predators from saliva traces on game species and/or livestock kills is gaining increasing importance in wildlife management, particularly in areas where direct wildlife-human conflicts regularly occur. When the noninvasive sampling of hairs and scats is difficult, as with rare and elusive predators, saliva samples constitute a potentially useful source of DNA. To test the feasibility of this approach in obtaining an accurate genotype of the predator, we applied an experimental approach. Captive wolves (Canis lupus) and lynxes (Lynx lynx) were allowed to feed on freshly killed roe deer (Capreolus capreolus) pieces for 1 min. After removal, pieces were sampled for saliva traces after 1, 24, and 48 h. Microsatellite analysis revealed that error rates and amplification failure increased sharply over time. While samples collected after 1 and 24 h yielded > 83% complete genotypes, values dropped to < 50% for samples collected after 48 h, of which 7% were incorrect even when consensus genotypes from 9 polymerase chain reactions were obtained. Our results stress the importance of rapid sampling after carcass detection, as well as implementing a multiple-tubes approach when using microsatellite markers for genetic predator identification based on saliva traces.

[SECTION] (no title)
The noninvasive collection of tissue samples containing DNA traces, such as hair, scat, or feathers, has proven particularly useful in the field of molecular ecology and conservation biology during the last few decades (Schwartz et al. 2007). DNA isolates from these samples enable species, sex, and individual identification through sequencing or multilocus genotyping, without the need for direct observation, or as a complement to it. Recently, the usefulness of saliva traces as a source of noninvasively collected DNA has been realized. Various studies have successfully isolated DNA from saliva traces left by predators on carcasses of livestock (Ernest and Boyce 2000;Williams et al. 2003;Blejwas et al. 2006;Sundqvist et al. 2008;Caniglia et al. 2013), wild mammals (Pun et al. 2009;Wengert et al. 2013;Mumma et al. 2014), and birds (Steffens et al. 2012) or by ungulates on twigs (Nichols et al. 2012). These studies have helped elucidate human-predator conflicts (e.g., predation on livestock, pets, or game species), predator-prey interactions (e.g., addressing the relative impacts of invasive predators on native fauna- Steffens et al. 2012), and the foraging behavior of ungulates.
In the context of human-predator interactions, it is particularly important to assess the suitability of DNA isolates from saliva traces for species identification with the aim of facilitating compensation payments or identifying a particular problematic individual through multilocus genotyping. For example, saliva from the wounds of predator-killed sheep has been used to identify mountain lions (Puma concolor), bobcats (Lynx rufus- Ernest and Boyce 2000), coyotes (Canis latrans- Williams et al. 2003;Blejwas et al. 2006), and wolves (C. lupus- Caniglia et al. 2013) as the perpetrators. In some instances, uncontrolled dogs (C. familiaris) were responsible for the attacks (Sundqvist et al. 2008;Echegaray and Vilà 2010;Caniglia et al. 2013). These results contribute to scientific knowledge, and also have societal and management implications.
Saliva samples, as well as other noninvasively collected samples (e.g., hair, scats), can be compromised by low DNA content and quality, which can lead to genotyping errors, such as allelic dropout or false alleles (Navidi et al. 1992;Taberlet et al. 1999). Damage to DNA occurs as a function of time and environmental conditions, and is also affected by the tissue type (Pääbo et al. 2004). However, appropriate practices have been developed to minimize and detect errors, including sample preservation methods that prevent extensive DNA damage and degradation, such as freezing, drying, or the use of buffers (Laird et al. 1991;Seutin et al. 1991;Frantzen et al. 1998), DNA extraction methods that optimize yield and speed and prevent further degradation (Rohland and Hofreiter 2007;Rohland et al. 2009), and appropriate laboratory practices (Navidi et al. 1992;Taberlet et al. 1996;Fernando et al. 2003;Leonard 2008;Caniglia et al. 2014). In particular, a multiple-tubes approach (Navidi et al. 1992;Taberlet et al. 1996) has become standard practice when samples have low DNA quantity or quality. This method consists of genotyping each locus several times to detect genotyping errors such as allelic dropout and false alleles.
No experimental evaluations of genotyping accuracy for DNA isolated from saliva traces on wildlife kills collected under different conditions have been reported. Here, we measured amplification success and the accuracy of species identification for the predator using microsatellite loci of wolves and lynxes (Lynx lynx) to help optimize sampling strategies and laboratory practices.

[SECTION] materials and methods
Samples and laboratory procedures.-To simulate a typical kill event by a wild predator and evaluate patterns of genotyping accuracy over time, 4 captive wolves and 4 captive lynxes were allowed to chew on pieces of roe deer for 1 min at a wildlife park (Wildpark "Alte Fasanerie," Hanau Klein-Auheim, Germany). The guidelines approved by the American Society of Mammalogists (Sikes et al. 2011) were observed at all times. The animals were kept under observation during the entire process to ensure that only 1 animal chewed on each piece. There were no other wolves or lynxes in the enclosure other than the ones used in this study. The roe deer pieces were then removed from the animals and placed under cover outdoors. We conducted the experiments in November, when temperatures stayed above 6°C overnight and did not exceed 14°C during the day. Each piece was sampled for saliva traces using cotton swabs soaked in 1× TE buffer (10 mM Tris, 1 mM EDTA; pH 8.0) at 1, 24, and 48 h after predator exposure. We sampled with 3 cotton swabs at each time interval, which allowed us to perform 9 polymerase chain reactions (PCRs) per locus, time interval, and individual (see below). The samples were stored dry at room temperature, by introducing the swab in an Eppendorf tube with no lid, placed inside a Falcon tube containing silica beads.
We extracted DNA from each sample using the QIAamp DNA Investigator Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) following the manufacturer's conditions. To increase the total DNA yield, an additional elution step was performed. One DNA extract was obtained per swab, making a total of 3 DNA extracts per individual and time interval. Each DNA extract was then PCRamplified for each marker 3 times, resulting in a total of 9 PCRs per locus, time interval, and individual, resulting in 36 PCRs per locus and time interval.
We amplified unlinked autosomal microsatellite loci regularly used in our laboratory, which had been previously selected from the literature for their application in genetic and monitoring studies. For wolves, we amplified DNA in 2 multiplex PCRs, one for CPH5 (Fredholm and Winterø 1995), FH2054, and FH2161 (Francisco et al. 1996), and the other for FH2010, FH2137, FH2140 (Francisco et al. 1996), and vWF (Shibuya et al. 1994). CPH5 contains a dinucleotide repeat, FH2010, FH2054, FH2137, FH2140, and FH2161 tetranucleotide repeats, and vWF, a hexanucleotide motif. For lynxes, we again amplified DNA in 2 multiplex PCRs, one for Fca001, Fca090, Fca115, andFca149, andthe other for Fca045,  Fca391, andFca559 (Menotti-Raymond andO 'Brien 1995;Menotti-Raymond et al. 1999). All loci used for lynxes have dinucleotide repeats, except Fca391 and Fca559, which contain tetranucleotide repeats. Due to poor performance, Fca001 and Fca559 were excluded from our analyses.
We performed multiplex PCRs in a 10-μl solution containing HotStarTaq Master Mix (Qiagen), 0.2 μM of each primer, 2 ng BSA, and genomic DNA. PCRs were carried out in a T1 plus Thermocycler (Biometra GmbH, Göttingen, Germany) with an initial denaturation step of 95ºC for 3 min followed by 5 cycles of 94ºC for 30 s, 60ºC for 90 s, and 72ºC for 60 s; another 5 cycles of 94ºC for 30 s, 58ºC for 90 s, and 72ºC for 60 s; 5 cycles of 94ºC for 30 s, 54ºC for 90 s, and 72ºC for 60 s; 20 cycles of 94ºC for 30 s, 54ºC for 90 s, and 72ºC for 60 s; and a final extension of 72ºC for 30 min. PCR products were electrophoresed on a ABI3730 DNA Analyzer (Life Technologies GmbH, Darmstadt, Germany) and fragment sizes were determined using GeneMarker v1.90 (Softgenetics LLC, State College, Pennsylvania) by comparison to LIZ600 as an internal size standard.
Data analyses.-We determined amplification success and accuracy at recovering the predator's genotype over time, by assuming that the true genotype was a consensus of the genotypes obtained from feces samples collected in the animals' enclosures. We collected 2 or 3 fresh feces per individual and performed 4 PCRs per locus and sample, resulting in 8 or 12 PCRs per locus and individual. All PCRs amplified successfully and yielded consistent genotypes, with only 8 allelic dropouts and 1 false allele in the entire data set. Allelic dropout was defined as the lack of no amplification of one of the alleles in a heterozygous individual, and a false allele as the amplification of a PCR artifact, which can be caused by the accidental and highly efficient amplification of short nontarget PCR templates, especially when there is little target template available (Broquet and Petit 2004).
The 3 samples collected per individual at each time interval enabled us to obtain 3 DNA extracts; then, we performed 3 replicate PCRs on each extract. Therefore, each locus was genotyped 9 times per individual and time interval, resulting in a total of 36 PCRs per locus and time interval. This allowed us to obtain genotypes based on single PCRs, consensus genotypes based on 3 replicate PCRs (from the same DNA extract), and consensus genotypes based on 9 PCRs (from 3 different DNA extracts). We calculated the percentage of complete genotypes as well as the percentage of incorrect genotypes by comparing to the assumed true predator's genotype obtained as described above, and the rate of allelic dropout and of false alleles.
To obtain consensus genotypes based on 3 replicate PCRs, we identified a homozygote when the same allele amplified in at least 2 PCRs and no other allele was observed, and a heterozygote when the same 2 alleles amplified at least twice and no other allele was observed; in all other cases, the genotype was considered unreliable. To obtain consensus genotypes based on 9 PCRs, we identified a homozygote when the same allele amplified in ≥ 2 PCRs (each from a different extract) and no other allele amplified more than once, assuming the latter would be a false allele. We identified a heterozygote when the same 2 alleles amplified at least twice in PCRs from at least 2 DNA extracts, and another allele was not observed more than once, assuming the latter would also be a false allele. In any other situation, the genotype was considered unreliable. Identifying a homo-or heterozygote when it was found 3 times provided almost identical results (not shown).

[SECTION] results
Patterns of genotyping accuracy varied over time and were very similar for wolves and lynxes (Fig. 1; Table 1). For saliva samples collected 1 h after predator exposure, the percentage of complete genotypes based on single PCRs (no replicates considered) was 99.6% for wolves and 95.0% for lynxes, of which 5.2% and 3.9% were incorrect, respectively (Table 1). For 3-PCR replicates, the percentage of complete genotypes decreased slightly to 96.4% for wolves and 91.7% for lynxes, of which 2.4% and 1.7% were incorrect for wolves and lynxes, respectively (Fig. 1; Table 1). Based on 9 PCRs, complete genotypes were 96.4% for wolves and 95.0% for lynxes, and all matched the true genotype.
Similar results were obtained for saliva samples collected 24 h after predator exposure. Based on single PCRs, 98.4% and 83.3% of complete genotypes were obtained for wolves and lynxes, respectively; when consensus genotypes based on 3 PCRs were considered, complete genotypes for wolves were 91.7% and 83.3% for lynxes; and based on 9 PCRs, we obtained 96.4% and 95.0% complete genotypes for wolves and lynxes, respectively. Similar to the samples collected after 1 h, incorrect genotypes decreased when consensus genotypes were considered; incorrect genotypes ranged between 2% and 10% for single PCRs and between 2% and 4% for 3-PCR consensus genotypes. Again, similar to the samples collected ≥ 1 h after predator exposure, no incorrect genotypes were obtained when results from 9 PCRs were evaluated.
Saliva samples collected 48 h after predator exposure yielded, however, < 50% complete genotypes. Based on single PCRs, 22% were incorrect genotypes for wolves and 23.3% for lynxes; incorrect genotypes decreased to 7-9% for consensus genotypes based on 3 PCRs and were about 7% for both species based on 9 PCRs. Incorrect genotypes were due to both allelic dropout and false (artifact) alleles. Allelic dropout was detected PCRs. Note that no incorrect genotypes were obtained when 9 PCRs were used to infer the consensus genotype for samples taken at 1 and 24 h. in all samples, whereas false alleles appeared mostly in samples collected after 48 h (Table 2).

[SECTION] discussion
Our results showed that amplification success and the number of complete genotypes decreased as sampling time increased since the carcass was exposed to the predator increased. Comparison of the experimental genotypes to the assumed true genotype allowed us to determine that incorrect genotypes were predominantly the consequence of allelic dropout and, to a lesser degree, of false alleles. This is consistent with other reports from the literature for samples with low DNA quantity and quality (e.g., Sefc et al. 2003;Adams and Waits 2007;Muñoz-Fuentes et al. 2010;Davoli et al. 2013;Frosch et al. 2014). Our data showed that while allelic dropout was most common in samples collected 1 and 24 h since predator exposure, false alleles appeared mostly in samples collected after 48 h. We found that the largest decrease in amplification success and obtaining a complete genotype occurred between 24 and 48 h after predator exposure. While samples collected within 24 h of predator exposure yielded 83-100% complete genotypes, samples collected after 48 h produced < 50% complete genotypes and 7% were incorrect even when 9 PCRs were considered. These results indicate a dramatic decrease in the quality of samples collected 24-48 h after predator exposure. For saliva samples collected from kills, Caniglia et al. (2013) found a strong correlation between genotyping success and the estimated time interval between the attack and saliva sampling, and reported that sampling should take place no later than 36 h after the attack (Fico et al. 2005, in Caniglia et al. 2013). Similarly, for fecal samples collected under field conditions, the largest drop in quality occurred between 1 and 3 days after deposition (Murphy et al. 2007).
When analyzing samples with low DNA quantity or quality, a multiple-tubes approach is recommended, as this increases the probability of detecting allelic dropout and false alleles and, thus, decreases the probability of obtaining incorrect genotypes (Navidi et al. 1992;Taberlet et al. 1996). Indeed, for saliva traces collected from carcasses 1 and 24 h after predator exposure, we found that 2-10% of the genotypes were incorrect when genotypes were based on individual PCRs, 2-4% were incorrect when based on 3 replicate PCRs (consensus genotypes), but none were incorrect when results from 9 PCRs were considered. Thus, multiple PCRs from different DNA extracts may be needed depending on the accuracy that a particular study aims to achieve. For example, to determine whether a wolf or dog attacked livestock, 1 or 3 replicate PCRs at loci with alleles that unambiguously differentiate between these species may suffice. However, increasing the number of DNA extracts and PCR replicates may be needed when individual identification is important, such as in situations where identifying a particular individual is the goal (e.g., Frosch et al. 2011;Caniglia et al. 2013) or in population genetic and monitoring studies. In contrast, samples collected ≥ 48 h after predator exposure yielded < 50% complete genotypes and 7% of these were incorrect, even when results from 9 PCRs were considered. This dramatic drop in performance between samples collected 24 or 48 h after predator exposure demonstrates the need to carefully consider the design of sample collection protocols and to balance the costs of monitoring frequency, the accuracy of the genotypes that need to be obtained, and the number of samples that is reasonable to discard after several rounds of PCRs.
Samples are compromised not only by time in the field but also by weather conditions and the presence of scavengers. During the time we conducted our experiments, temperatures stayed above 6°C overnight and did not exceed 14°C during the day. In general, low temperatures and dry conditions slow DNA degradation (Pääbo et al. 2004). For feces, genotyping success for samples collected under hot and dry conditions was higher than for those collected when conditions were warm and humid (Farrell et al. 2000), and the same was true for samples collected in winter compared to those collected in summer (Lucchini et al. 2002). Scavengers are also a concern, as they can contaminate the sample with exogenous DNA. This problem can be alleviated to a certain degree by the implementation of laboratory protocols designed to identify a range of potential species that may have come into contact with the carcass (Pun et al. 2009), as well as conducting amplifications with primers that are species specific. Such procedures need to be optimized in the laboratory using high-quality samples.
Our experiment shows that saliva samples from carcasses are a reliable source of DNA for individual identification of predators via genotyping, provided certain practices are followed. Because amplification failure, allelic dropout, and artifact alleles increased with time, and samples collected ≥ 48 h after predator exposure may yield an incorrect genotype even when results from 9 PCRs are considered, we stress the importance of sampling a kill as soon as possible after detection. In addition, we recommend that people collecting samples be pre-trained, that samples be taken with cotton swabs soaked in a buffer solution that is suitable for DNA conservation, and that multiple swabs be used to provide enough template for performing replicate PCRs in a multiple-tube approach when multilocus microsatellite genotyping will be conducted. Although photo trapping, video recording, and radiotelemetry are alternative methods that enable predator species identification, DNA isolates from saliva or other noninvasively collected material may be less expensive to collect and process, and permit both individual and sex identification. Saliva samples from predator kills provide a promising and potentially useful source of DNA, if samples are collected soon after a kill.

