[SECTION] title
Extra-Pair Paternity Confirmed in Wild White-Handed Gibbons

[SECTION] abstract
Knowledge of the genetic mating system of animal species is essential for our understanding of the evolution of social systems and individual reproductive strategies. In recent years, genetic methods have uncovered an unexpected diversity of paternal genetic contributions across diverse animal social mating systems, but particularly in pair-living species. In most pair-living birds, for example, genetic and behavioral observations have confirmed a previously unknown significance of extra-pair copulations (EPCs) and extra-pair paternity. Among mammals, white-handed gibbons (Hylobates lar) are also known to live in pairs and are traditionally believed to be single-male single-female breeders. However, at Khao Yai National Park, Thailand, behavioral observations have confirmed the occurrence of both EPCs and functional multi-male grouping, but knowledge about the genetic mating system is still unavailable. In this study, we genotyped 89 white-handed gibbons of the Khao Yai population based on fecal samplings and were able to determine paternity for 41 offspring through short tandem repeat analysis. We found that females' stable social partners sired the majority (90.5%) of offspring (N ¼ 38), while only a few (7.1%) offspring (n ¼ 2 confirmed cases; n ¼ 1 inferred case) were conceived with extrapair partners. The paternity of one offspring remained inconclusive (2.4%), because the offspring's genotype did not mismatch with the genotypes of two potential sires. Like other predominantly pairliving species, gibbons appear to follow a mixed-reproductive strategy. The genetic mating system of wild white-handed gibbons is best described as flexible, primarily monogamous and opportunistically promiscuous. Am.

[SECTION] introduction
When the birth of a mammalian infant is observed, maternal genetic kinship is unquestionable.
In contrast to a mother, however, reliably identifying an infant's sire from a pool of males is challenging and depends on employing molecular methods, even in species where adults live in stable social pairs [Martin et al., 2007]. The use of non-invasive genetic techniques in wild populations [Arandjelovic et al., 2009;Hughes, 1998;Nsubuga et al., 2004] has resulted in a better understanding of genetic mating systems [sensu Kappeler & van Schaik, 2002], which is essential for a comprehensive insight in male and female reproductive behavior and primate social systems.
The mating system of pair-living animals was once believed to be simple because where one male resided with a single female it was assumed that this male would also mate monogamously with the female who would likewise mate monoandrously [Gubernick, 1994;Kleiman, 1977;Mock, 1985;Selander, 1972;Wittenberger & Tilson, 1980]. This simplistic view has been shattered following the widespread documentation of extra-pair copulations (EPCs) and extra-pair paternity (EPP) in pair-living birds [Birkhead et al., 1987;Griffith et al., 2002;Hughes, 1998]. In birds, the need of biparental care to successfully rear offspring has been a common explanation for the prevalence of pair-living [Møller & Cuervo, 2000]. In contrast to birds, male mammals have fewer opportunities to provide parental care and consequently social monogamy has been described in only about 5% of mammalian species, including such diverse species as, for example, greater white-toothed shrews [Favre et al., 1997], Malagasy giant jumping rats [Sommer & Tichy, 1999], alpine marmots [Goossens et al., 1998], prairie voles [Roberts et al., 1998], Kirk's dik-diks [Brotherton & Komers, 2003;Brotherton et al., 1997], and cotton-top tamarins [Ziegler & Snowdon, 2000]. However, how the distribution and frequency of EPP is related to parental care is still unclear, since EPP has been found in the presence as well as the absence of paternal care [e.g., paternal care present: African wild dogs: Girman et al., 1997, fat-tailed dwarf lemurs: Fietz et al., 2000, large tree shrews: Munshi-South, 2007; parental care absent: alpine marmots: Goossens et al., 1998;fork-marked lemurs: Schülke et al., 2004]. Thus, despite a more widespread absence of paternal care in mammals compared to pair-living birds, pair-living mammals may or may not practice genetic monogamy and therefore, as in birds, a distinction between a social mating system and a genetic mating system is required to assess their reproductive strategies [Birkhead et al., 1987;Cohas & Allainé, 2009;Griffith et al., 2002;Hughes, 1998].
In contrast to expectations of "faithful" behavior in pair-living species where both partners provide parental care, Trivers [1972] argued that it would theoretically always be beneficial for a pair-living male to engage in a mixed reproductive strategy by providing paternal care to his offspring if needed, but to also seek EPC opportunities with additional females to increase his own reproductive success. Although the function of EPCs is still discussed [Griffith et al., 2002;Jennions & Petrie, 2000;Wolff & Macdonald, 2004;Zeh & Zeh, 2001] both males and females probably obtain benefits from this strategy. By engaging in EPCs, males have a chance to increase their reproductive success if the extrapair female conceives, and a female may gain benefits by: (i) increasing paternity confusion to protect offspring from potential infanticide, because a male who has copulated with a female is less likely to commit infanticide [Wolff & Macdonald, 2004]; (ii) insuring against infertility of a social mates [Griffith, 2007]; (iii) direct benefits such as additional paternal investment from an extra-pair male [Møller, 2000]; (iv) increasing viability of offspring sired by different males [Keil & Sachser, 1998], and finally, (v) choosing a sire of superior genetic quality compared to the social partner to improve the genetic make-up of their offspring [Kokko, 1998;Neff & Pitcher, 2005].
A prerequisite for EPP to occur is that pair-living females engage in EPCs. The social setting significantly influences these opportunities for females in terms of, for example, the number of available males in the group and/or in neighboring groups. In territorial species, the proportion of overlap between territories and the frequency of intergroup encounters are important variables influencing females' and males' potential for EPCs.
In this study we assess genetic relationships between males, females, and offspring in a wild population of white-handed gibbons (Hylobates lar) residing at Khao Yai National Park, Thailand. During more than two decades of field observations, researchers have documented changes in the composition of study groups due to immigration and emigration (including multi-male groups) [Barelli et al., 2008;Reichard et al., 2012], thus already questioning the conservative view that gibbons may pair for life. At Khao Yai, white-handed gibbons live in groups composed of pairs with their putative offspring or they form multi-male groups of a single breeding female with two or more sexually mature males [Barelli et al., 2007;Reichard et al., 2012], and semi-solitary individuals have also been observed [Reichard et al., 2012]. Moreover, a substantial portion of each group's home-range overlaps with the territories of on average five neighboring groups [Asensio et al., 2011;Reichard, 2009], suggesting a high potential for EPCs. Considering that whitehanded gibbon males provide no direct paternal care, like males in many other pair-living mammals [Komers & Brotherton, 1997], it is unlikely that females reject EPCs out of fear of reduced paternal care from their social partner. Lastly, females of this population are known to mate polyandrously, including EPCs even during female fertile periods [Barelli et al., 2007[Barelli et al., , 2008;;Reichard, 1995Reichard, , 2009]]. Thus, Khao Yai gibbons provide a useful opportunity to assess how frequently EPP occurs in a primarily pair-living primate, and whether males in pair-living groups attain significantly different reproductive output than males living in multi-male groups.
By using short tandem repeat (STR) or microsatellite analysis from fecal samples collected non-invasively from 17 gibbon groups, of which 14 are well known for more than 20 years, we examined genetic relationships and assessed, by quantifying the frequency of EPP, the genetic mating system in the Khao Yai white-handed gibbon population.

[SECTION] study site
The study was carried out on the wild Mo Singto-Klong E-Tau white-handed gibbon population (H. lar) close to the headquarter of Khao Yai National Park (2,168 km 2 ; 14°26'N, 101°22'E; $150 km NE of Bangkok). The park consists of a sandstone plateau and is covered by seasonal evergreen rain forest ranging in elevation between 600 and 1,000 m above sea level [Lynam et al., 2006]. The study site covers approximately 8.5 km 2 of hilly terrain with continuous forest cover.
All individuals included in this study are subjects of ongoing socioecology and behavioral studies since the early 1990s [e.g., Barelli et al., 2007Barelli et al., , 2008Barelli et al., , 2011;;Reichard, 2003;Reichard et al., 2012]. Accurate birth and demographic records of the population are available, which allowed us to run paternity tests.

[SECTION] social organization and social mating system
Although gibbons are still thought to live in pairs [Bartlett, 2007], at Khao Yai National Park group compositions and the social mating system are more flexible [Barelli et al., 2007[Barelli et al., , 2008;;Reichard, 2009]. Similar flexibility has also been observed in other hylobatid populations [Kenyon et al., 2011;Lappan, 2007]. During annual census walks over 16 years (from 1992 to 2007) on average 76.9% of social units observed lived in pairs, consisting of a single adult male, a single adult female and up to four offspring, whereas 21.2% lived in multi-male/one-female groups with more than one adult male unrelated to the resident female, and 1.9% consisted of one-male/ multi-female groups [Reichard & Barelli, 2008]. The white-handed gibbon density at the site is high with 4.0 groups and 15.9 individuals/km 2 [Barelli et al., 2007], but it is not exceptional compared to other gibbon populations [Leighton, 1987;Mitani, 1990;Reichard, 2009;Yanuar, 2009]. Following previous studies [Barelli et al., 2007[Barelli et al., , 2008]], we differentiated adult males into three categories based on status and involvement with a resident female: (i) primary males, (ii) secondary male partners and (iii) neighboring males. Primary males were either the single male in pair-living groups or the male in multi-male groups who engaged in singing duets and the majority of copulations with the adult female [Barelli et al., 2008]. Secondary males were the remaining males in multi-male units [Barelli et al., 2008], while neighboring males were considered separately as a female's potential extra-pair partners.
We recently demonstrated [Barelli et al., 2008] that although the majority of mating is skewed towards primary males, half of the females living in multi-male units also copulated with secondary males. Copulating with both primary and secondary males occurred throughout female menstrual cycles and continued during pregnancy when conception was impossible. Irrespective of alternative functions copulations may serve (i.e., social bonding and reducing male aggression toward a female) in addition to achieving conception, female mating behavior strongly contrasts with the common view that white-handed gibbon females are socio-sexually monoandrous and suggests that female gibbons are more precisely characterized as sexually polyandrous [Barelli et al., 2008;Reichard, 2009].

[SECTION] subjects and sample collection
A total of 89 gibbons, for which social histories were available [Reichard & Barelli, 2008;Reichard et al., 2012], were examined in this study, which at one point in time belonged to either of 14 habituated groups (A, B, C, D, E, H, J, M, N, R, S, T, W, and NOS) or to one of three neighboring groups (G, ER, and  (1996-2005 and 2010-2011), Khao Yai National Park, Thailand
( ), three surrounding groups which were not habituated to human presence; [ ], individuals for which mtDNA analysis was available but no STR was possible.
a
Male not belonging to any other group.
NER), and one adult male was considered solitary (Table I).
We collected about 10 g of feces from target animals using disposable gloves directly after an individual had defecated. Between 1996 and 2005, UR, CB and colleagues collected 656 feces preserved in 70% ethanol [Kohn et al., 1995] or RNAlater (Ambion) [Nsubuga et al., 2004], or dried in silica gel beads [Wasser et al., 1997]. These feces were kept frozen at the Max-Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Germany, until they were generously provided to us to complement this study sample. Feces stored in ethanol were desiccated by silica gel beads prior to DNA extraction. In addition, between 2010 and 2011, K.M. collected 320 feces using the two-step storage method [Matsudaira et al., 2013;Nsubuga et al., 2004]. All fecal samples were stored at ambient temperature on site and at 4°C in the laboratories.

[SECTION] dna extraction
DNA was extracted using a QIAamp® DNA Stool Mini Kit (Qiagen, Germany). In order to maximize the amount of DNA extracted, we followed the modified protocols proposed by Nsubuga et al. [2004]. For desiccated feces, a specimen (approximately 100-150 mg) was scraped from the surface of feces and suspended in 1.6 ml Buffer ASL (Qiagen). For feces collected in RNAlater, 2 ml of the mixture was centrifuged for 15 min at 3,000g and the supernatant was removed. The specimen was centrifuged a second time for 15 min at 500g and the supernatant was also removed. The feces were resuspended in 1.6 ml Buffer ASL. The specimens in Buffer ASL were vortexed and incubated overnight at room temperature prior to DNA extraction steps. In addition, at the final step of extraction, DNA was incubated with 200 ml Buffer AE (Qiagen) for 20 min before centrifugation.

[SECTION] dna quantification
In order to avoid genotyping errors derived from allelic drop outs [Morin et al., 2001;Navidi et al., 1992;Taberlet et al., 1996], we repeated PCR based on the quantity of DNA as in previous studies [Morin et al., 2001]. DNA derived from subjects was quantified by Real-Time PCR using TaqMan® probe assay performed with a StepOnePlus™ Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems, USA). We used probe and primers which had been designed for c-myc gene: c-myc 105 assay combination [Smith et al., 2002]. Real-Time PCR was carried out in a 20 ml cocktail containing 2 ml DNA template, TaqMan® Fast Advanced Master Mix (Applied Biosystems), 250 nM probe and 900 nM of each primer. Cycle conditions were as follows: pre-incubation at 95°C for 2 sec, followed by 45 cycles of 95°C for 1 sec, 60°C for 20 sec. Triplicate sets of standards of known DNA amount were included in each analysis: DNA extracted from immortalized B-cell line of a whitehanded gibbon was quantified by spectrophotometer and diluted to 20 ng, 5 ng, 1.25 ng, 312 pg, 78.1 pg and 19.5 pg per 2 ml for the standards. Analysis and calculations were performed using StepOne Software v2.1 (Applied Biosystems).

[SECTION] str genotyping
STR genotyping was done for a total of 12 loci with tetra-nucleotide repeat motif originally designed for humans (Table II), the utility of which has been already reported, at least for some loci, in the same population of white-handed gibbons: D1S548, D1S1656, D2S1329G, D3S1766, D3S1768, D4S243, D5S1457, D6S501, D10S1432, D11S2002G, D13S321, and D20S206 [Chambers et al., 2004]. Sequences of primers were cited from UniSTS database of the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) website (http://www.nubi.nlm.nih.gov/). However, for loci D2S1329G and D11S2002G, reverse primers were redesigned because of poor amplification. The 5'-end of the forward primer of each locus was labeled by one of four fluorescent markers: 6-FAM, VIC, NED, or PET. PCR amplifications were carried out in a 20 ml PCR cocktail containing 2 (or 3) ml DNA template, PCR Buffer II for AmpliTaq Gold®, 3 mM Mg 2þ , 200 mM each dNTP, 50 mg BSA, 200 nM each primer and 0.5 unit AmpliTaq Gold® (Applied Biosystems). Cycle conditions were as follows: pre-incubation at 95°C for 5 min, followed by 45-50 cycles (depending on the locus, Table II) of 95°C for 30 sec, 48-55°C (depending on the locus, Table II) for 30 sec and 72°C for 30 sec, and a final extension at 72°C for 30 min followed by 4°C for 5 min. One to three PCR product (s) labeled by different fluorescent colors were separated by electrophoresis at once on an ABI PRISM® 3100-Avant Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems) with size standard, Genescan™ 600 LIZ (Applied Biosystems), and were sized using GeneMapper ID v3.2 (Applied Biosystems). Two to seven independent PCR cycles were repeated for each locus depending on the quantity of DNA produced [Morin et al., 2001]. CERVUS 3.0 [Kalinowski et al., 2007] was used to calculate observed and expected heterozygosities, to test deviation from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE), and to estimate a null allele frequency for each locus. GENA-LEX 6.4 [Peakall & Smouse, 2006] was used to calculate the probability of identity.

[SECTION] mitochondrial dna
To confirm mother-offspring relationships, we determined the 631 or 632-base sequences of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) including the hyper variable segment I (HVSI) [Matsudaira et al., 2013]. This was particularly effective in three cases (two cases in group D and one case in group E) where the STR genotypes of mothers could not be confirmed. In addition, the confirmation allowed us to minimize the potential effect of errors in the sample collection.

[SECTION] paternity tests
Among 82 individuals whose STR genotypes were determined, 44 individuals were born during the study period of the Khao Yai Gibbon long-term Project. For only two offspring, the resident adult male at the time of conception (i.e., 7 months prior to the offspring's birth date) was not genotyped because no sample was available. Thus, we excluded these two offspring and analyzed the paternity of the remaining 42 offspring. Of the 42 offspring, 27 were conceived in pair-living groups and 15 in multi-male groups. In multi-male group D, all three offspring were conceived while the same two adult males were present, but no genotype for the secondary male was available.
We considered as potential sires adult males of 8 years or older age and 7-year-old subadult males [Reichard, 2003] in cases where sub-adult males were living in the same group as the offspring (but when the offspring's mother was not the sub-adult's mother) or were residents in a neighboring group of the offspring at the time of conception. Due to a lack of reports of mother-son copulations in the wild, we excluded sub-adult males residing with their mother at the time of conception as potential sires. The complete number of potential sires in neighboring groups was not known for some non-habituated groups. In such case, we assumed the presence of one potential sire for each non-habituated group. For the 42 offspring tested, the average number of potential sires and the number of potential sires sampled were 8.17 (AE1.95 SD) and 5.81 (AE1.90 SD), respectively.
Based on STR genotypes, paternity was assigned via CERVUS 3.0 [Kalinowski et al., 2007]. This program compares likelihood ratios of two most-likely candidate sires, and assigns paternity using statistical criteria generated by computer simulation. The algorithm of the program takes genotyping errors into account, as well as the presence of close relatives in the study population [Marshall et al., 1998; but see Jones & Ardren, 2003], which was the case in our study. For the paternity simulation in CERVUS, we were able to use 71% of the entire possible sampling subjects and up to eight potential sires per offspring. To further protect results against false paternity identification we conservatively also considered 1% genotyping error and 10,000 simulation cycles. The confidence levels of analysis were set at 95% for relaxed level and at 99% for strict level. Because 2 of the 12 loci deviated from HWE, 2 data sets, 1 with 12 and 1 with 10 loci were used during analysis. We considered cases of EPP when a neighboring male was assigned as sire, or when none of the primary and secondary males were assigned as sire. Though paternity was assigned based on the likelihoods, we counted the number of allelic mismatches between the paternal alleles of offspring and the alleles of potential sires via CERVUS in order to detect cases where no mismatches were observed with more than one male.
To compare the reproductive output of pair-living males and primary males of multi-male groups, we carried out two-tailed Fisher's exact test in R [ R Core Team, 2012].
We detected some unnoticed dispersal events in the population and were able to confirm and correct individual migrations through careful examination of genotypic data. In the few cases where observational data and genetic data disagreed, we used genotypic identities in our analyses.

[SECTION] ethical standard
We conducted the study without direct contact or interaction with the gibbons and under permission of the National Research Council of Thailand (NRCT) and the Department of National Parks, Wildlife and Plant Conservation (DNP) of Thailand. Our data collection procedure adhered to the American Society of Primatologists principles for the ethical treatment of primates, and complied with the laws governing wildlife research in Thailand.

[SECTION] genotypes and identity of individuals
We determined STR genotypes for 82 individuals out of 89 sampled individuals. For 69.5% of samples (N ¼ 57), STR genotypes were confirmed from two or more independent feces. In addition, among the 89 individuals genotyped through mtDNA, we found 11 haplotypes [Matsudaira et al., 2013]. Since two of the 82 individuals (from which STR genotypes were determined) were collected during an early stage of group habituation, their identities were ambiguous. However, we included them into the analyses because the genotypes clearly showed the presence of both individuals in the respective groups. The number of alleles per locus varied between 5 and 14. Observed heterozygosities ranged from 0.585 to 0.878 and expected heterozygosities ranged from 0.584 to 0.893. Two loci showed significant deviation from HWE after Bonferroni correction (D3S1768: P ¼ 0.003 and D11S2002G: P ¼ 0.004, Table III). However, since we did not detect any allelic mismatches between 41 mother-offspring relationships for all 12 loci, including the two which deviated from HWE, and estimated null allele frequencies of the two loci were low (0.044 and 0.040, respectively, Table III), we considered such deficiencies deriving from sampling of a kin structured population. The expected probability of identity estimated over 12 loci was 6.8 Â 10 À13 suggesting that the chance that two randomly taken individuals from this population have the same genotype at multiple loci is unlikely. Although the presence of close relatives among subjects might potentially lead to underestimating the probability of identifying individuals, we did not detect a single pair of individuals with the exact same genotype.

[SECTION] paternity
Paternity assignment using both 12 and 10 loci gave similar results, except for one case in which paternity was assigned to different males (i.e., M-F1, Table IV). However, since the difference found was minor, we only present results from the analysis of 12 loci. Paternity based on CERVUS at a confidence level of 99% could be assigned to a total of 41 individuals (97.6% of total paternity tests). For the majority of the offspring (N ¼ 38), paternity was assigned to primary males (90.5% of total paternity tests) while in two cases, offspring were sired by known adult males from a neighboring group (4.8%). In one case, both a primary and a neighboring male revealed no allelic mismatch with the offspring (i.e., N-AF2, Table IV). This case of paternity was considered "inconclusive." In one remaining case, where paternity could not be assigned to any potential sire sampled (including the resident male present at the time of conception), we considered this as an additional EPP event. However, to indicate the indirect assessment, we labeled it "inferred EPP" (Table IV).
When separating the paternity data by social organization, among the 27 offspring born in pairliving groups, 23 offspring (85.2%) were sired by a primary male, three offspring (11.1%) were sired by extra-pair males (two "confirmed EPP" cases; one "inferred EPP" case) and one paternity case we considered inconclusive (Table IV). In the 15 offspring born in multi-male groups, 14 offspring (93.3%) were sired by primary males and one offspring (6.7%) was sired by a secondary male (Table IV). For two offspring born in multi-male group D, the genotype of the mother and the secondary male were    unavailable, thus although the primary male was assigned as the father, the possibility that the secondary male could theoretically also have sired the offspring could not be rejected (Table IV). Ratios of reproductive monopolization by pair-living primary males (23:3) and primary males in multi-male groups (14:1) did not differ statistically (Fisher's exact test, P ¼ 1.00). Thus, primary males living in multi-male groups were as successfully reproducing as primary males living in pairs.

[SECTION] discussion
This study provides the first genetic based evidence of EPP in the white-handed gibbons. Results further support the recently recognized sociosexual flexibility of this species [Barelli et al., 2007[Barelli et al., , 2008;;Reichard, 2009;Reichard et al., 2012]. At the same time, the data also indicate that the majority of paternity (90.5%) resulted from copulations of a female with her social partner, generally the male which females most frequently copulate with [i.e., 86% of copulations of cycling females occur with the primary male partner: Barelli et al., 2008] although exceptions to this pattern may exist [e.g., one cycling female performed 73% of her copulations with her secondary male partner: Barelli et al., 2008]. However, our finding that EPP accounts for approximately 7% of assigned paternities indicates that white-handed gibbons adjust their behavior flexibly according to opportunities, and that alternative reproductive strategies outside pair-living monogamy clearly exist in the Khao Yai population. Thus, the genetic mating system, like the social mating system, shows a high flexibility in this population that includes mating and reproducing monogamously and mating promiscuously. Such a finding is in agreement with a growing body of literature of promiscuous reproduction in other predominately pair-living primates [Fietz et al., 2000;Schülke et al., 2004], solitary mammals [Nielsen & Nielsen, 2007], as well as many pair-living birds [Akçay & Roughgarden, 2007;Griffith et al., 2002].
The extent to which our data apply to other populations of this, or other, gibbon species is unclear at this stage. So far only one case of EPP (10% of assigned paternity) has been reported for the goldencheeked gibbon [Nomascus gabriellae; Kenyon et al., 2011] but no case of EPP was reported for Mueller's gibbons [Hylobates muelleri;Oka & Takenaka, 2001]. Given the documented degree of mating flexibility existing across the Hylobatidae, it is expected that EPP frequencies may vary between and even within populations. The factors influencing the incidence of EPP within any given population, however, have yet to be examined.

[SECTION] reproductive skew in multi-male groups
Interestingly, in multi-male groups, paternity was highly skewed towards primary males, in fact only one secondary male could be confirmed as a sire, despite the fact that secondary males have been observed to occasionally copulate with females also during a female's fertile period [Barelli et al., 2008]. On the other hand, the finding is also in line with observational data that demonstrated that copulations during the female's fertile phase were also skewed towards the female's primary male partner [Barelli et al., 2008]. The predominance of primary male sires in our study is interesting. For these males, it suggests that the risk, that is, the reproductive cost, of sharing a home range and socio-sexual access to a breeding female with a secondary male may be lower than expected from observations of polyandrous mating. Moreover, the cost may be outweighed by a potential benefit from joint forces of two or more males in repelling neighboring individuals from exploiting home range resources and/or from philandering males in search of EPC opportunities. Thus, a low potential reproductive cost to primary males could well explain the relatively widespread occurrence of multi-male groups in Khao Yai white-handed gibbons and provide an explanation as to why immigrant males do not always oust a resident male during a takeover, but tolerate a former sole resident male as a secondary male [Barelli et al., 2008;Reichard, 2003Reichard, , 2009]].
Primary males in multi-male groups may be able to dominate secondary males and effectively suppress a secondary male's sexual activity with the female when conception is most likely. Indeed, primary males have most frequent access to females during their fertile phase [Barelli et al., 2008]. Alternatively, it could be speculated that the higher reproductive success of primary males compared to secondary males (despite copulation activity of the latter during a female's fertile phase) may be related to individual variation in sperm quality and that primary males produce sperm that is more successful in sperm competition [Gomendio et al., 1998;Møller, 1988]. Gibbons' testes are relatively large for their small body weight [Harcourt et al., 1995] suggesting mild sperm competition, and primary and secondary males in multi-male groups have been observed to copulate with a female within hours [UR pers. obs.], thus raising the possibility for sperm competition in the female reproductive tract. Indirect support for speculating about variation in sperm quality among males comes also from our observation of one female copulating with her pair mate for many years without conceiving but giving birth again after a male immigration had occurred. However, no firm evidence yet exists for variation in sperm quality and the extent of sperm competition in white-handed gibbons.
In contrast, the very limited reproductive success of secondary males is even more surprising when viewed from their own perspective. A predicted benefit for a male who has lost the primary position to an immigrant and accepts a secondary status (as we have often observed in this population [Reichard et al., 2012]) is the potential for sharing paternities with the more dominant primary male group member. Although our sample size is small, we nevertheless suggest that the chances for reproduction by secondary males must be generally low and that, by inference, secondary males do not benefit from a multi-male situation in terms of increased reproductive chances. Alternatively we propose that staying in a multi-male group must be associated with other, more direct benefits for secondary males, such as staying on a familiar home range and avoiding a potentially costly transfer into another group or reducing the risk of predation compared to solitary living. This is especially relevant where primary and secondary males are relatives, for example father and son, which this study was now able to confirm in a few cases. However, since this is beyond the scope of our analyses, future studies are needed to clarify effects of relatedness on behavioral and genetic levels of the gibbon social system and, for example, examine potential benefits of males accepting secondary status. It must also be remembered that despite apparently low chances of successful reproduction, any chance of siring an offspring (i.e., a probability of >0) may be sufficient for a secondary male to stay in a multi-male group.

[SECTION] benefits of epcs and epp for females
Females may also benefit directly and/or indirectly from EPCs and EPP [Akçay & Roughgarden, 2007;Cohas & Allainé, 2009;Jennions & Petrie, 2000]. Among the direct benefits mammalian females may gain by performing EPCs, confusing paternity might be a more important benefit as it helps to reduce potential aggressive behavior, such as infanticide and sexual harassment, by neighboring males [Wolff & Macdonald, 2004]. However, firm evidence of sexually selected male infanticide in the Khao Yai white-handed gibbon population is still lacking.
Alternatively, females may copulate with an extra-pair male to obtain indirect, genetic benefits for the female's offspring, assuming that extra-pair males have superior genetic quality compared to those with which the female maintains a constant pair-bond. For nearly two decades this has been a popular explanation of female EPC behavior, however, this idea has more recently come under criticism for its weak empirical support [Akçay & Roughgarden, 2007;Arnqvist & Rowe, 2005;Westneat & Stewart, 2003], at least in birds. Indeed, the small amount of EPP observed in this study population, also questions the presence of "attractive males" in the Khao Yai gibbons.
Instead, the observed EPP suggests that females may compensate sterility of pair-mates by EPCs. Two of the three EPP occurred in the same group and during the residence of the same male in pair-living group N. Although the mating pattern of this particular female was not well known, she conceived two successive offspring with extra-pair partners. Thus, it may be speculated that the primary male was sterile, and it is likely that the female could be fertilized only by EPCs.
Other possible direct benefits include material benefits or paternal care a female may receive from an extra-pair partner, although the latter seems not very likely in white-handed gibbons since observations suggest that females raise young without direct assistance from males.
In summary, this study provides the first comprehensive genetic evidence showing that EPCs in female gibbons result in EPP. This extends and supports previous findings from demographic and behavioral observations suggesting that the mating system of the white-handed gibbon is more flexible than traditionally believed. Overall, our data highlight the importance of genetic paternity analysis for characterizing a species' mating system and their consequences in terms of reproductive output. Such data can ultimately help towards improving our understanding of the evolution of social and mating systems in primate species and mammals more broadly.

