[SECTION] title
Using Genetic Profiles of African Forest Elephants to Infer Population Structure, Movements, and Habitat Use in a Conservation and Development Landscape in Gabon

[SECTION] abstract
Conservation of wide-ranging species, such as the African forest elephant (Loxodonta cyclotis), depends on fully protected areas and multiple-use areas (MUA) that provide habitat connectivity. In the Gamba Complex of Protected Areas in Gabon, which includes 2 national parks separated by a MUA containing energy and forestry concessions, we studied forest elephants to evaluate the importance of the MUA to wideranging species. We extracted DNA from elephant dung samples and used genetic information to identify over 500 individuals in the MUA and the parks. We then examined patterns of nuclear microsatellites and mitochondrial control-region sequences to infer population structure, movement patterns, and habitat use by age and sex. Population structure was weak but significant, and differentiation was more pronounced during the wet season. Within the MUA, males were more strongly associated with open habitats, such as wetlands and savannas, than females during the dry season. Many of the movements detected within and between seasons involved the wetlands and bordering lagoons. Our results suggest that the MUA provides year-round habitat for some elephants and additional habitat for others whose primary range is in the parks. With the continuing loss of roadless wilderness areas in Central Africa, well-managed MUAs will likely be important to the conservation of wide-ranging species.

[SECTION] (no title)
Resumen: La conservación de especies con distribución amplia, como el elefante africano (Loxodonta cyclotis), depende de áreas completamente protegidas y de áreas de uso múltiple (AUM) que proporcionan conectividad de hábitat. En el Complejo Gamba de Áreas Protegidas en Gabón, que incluye 2 parques nacionales separados por un área de uso múltiple que contiene concesiones de energéticas y forestales, estudiamos a los elefantes para evaluar la importancia de las AUM para especies con distribución amplia. Extrajimos ADN de muestras de excretas de elefante y utilizamos la información genética para identificar más de 500 individuos en el AUM y los parques. Posteriormente examinamos los patrones en las secuencias de los microsatélites nucleares y de la región de control mitocondrial para inferir la estructura poblacional, los patrones de movimiento y el uso de hábitat por edad y sexo. La estructura poblacional fue débil pero

[SECTION] introduction
In Africa protected areas are often designed around sites that support species of conservation concern such as large mammals. Today protected areas are increasingly isolated in human-modified landscapes (Newmark 2008). Conservation of wide-ranging species therefore depends on managing multiple-use areas (MUA) to provide protection and connectivity among parks and private and public lands (Western et al. 2009;Ahlering et al. 2012aAhlering et al. , 2012b)).
Central African forest elephants (Loxodonta cyclotis) declined in abundance by 62%, and their geographic range decreased by 30% from 2002 to 2011 (Maisels et al. 2013). The largest remaining concentration of this species, approximately 53,000 individuals, is in Gabon (Blanc et al. 2007). In 2002 Gabon established 13 national parks that were designed in part to protect biodiversity and threatened wildlife such as elephants and apes (Laurance et al. 2006a). Surveys have been conducted to establish baseline abundance estimates for monitoring key species in parks, especially elephants (Maisels et al. 2006;Maisels et al. 2013). However, little scientifically collected wildlife data exist for areas outside parks.
To better understand connectivity between parks for forest elephants and inform land management, we conducted a multipart study in The Gamba Complex of Protected Areas, which covers 4% of Gabon's land area and has been under full or partial protection since 1947. Today it includes 2 national parks separated by a partially protected MUA from which timber and oil are extracted. In the MUA, human factors are stronger determinants of elephant distribution than ecological factors (Buij et al. 2007). Roads depress the abundance of forest elephants, especially in areas where hunting occurs (Laurance et al. 2006b). Individuals tracked via GPS collars have small home ranges and restricted movement patterns (Kolowski et al. 2010). Elephants in the MUA do not exhibit elevated fecal glucocorticoid metabolite levels (Munshi-South et al. 2008), and groups are com-posed primarily of related females and offspring (Munshi-South 2011). This information suggests that extractiveuse areas that offer protection from hunting are important habitat for elephants, but that management of habitat and human-wildlife interactions is necessary to maintain their conservation value.
We examined elephant population structure, movement patterns, and habitat use by sex and age group in the MUA during the wet and dry seasons and the national parks during the transition between seasons. Using fecal DNA to identify and track individuals, we tested whether elephants in the MUA were part of a resident population or temporary immigrants whose primary home ranges were in the nearby parks. Our findings may inform land management and extractive industries about elephant conservation management in MUA across central Africa.

[SECTION] study area
The Gamba Complex encompasses Loango National Park (1550 km 2 ), Moukalaba-Doudou National Park (4500 km 2 ), and an MUA in between (3585 km 2 ). The parks include sandy beach, mangrove forest, swamp, coastal scrub forest, open grassland, submontane forest, and large tracts of primary and mature secondary lowland humid forest. Both parks are highly forested. In Loango tree cover is approximately 80% and herbaceous cover is 16%. In Moukalaba-Doudou tree cover is 87% and herbaceous cover is 12% (Hansen et al. 2003). The center of the complex includes parts of the Iguéla and Ngové-Ndogo hunting areas, Setté Cama, and the Ndogo Lagoon. The southern zone includes the town of Gamba (Fig. 1).
We focused on the northern MUA, characterized by hilly terrain (<150 m elevation) with seasonally inundated forest dissecting upland rainforest. In the MUA, petroleum operations have been ongoing since the 1950s and selective logging has occurred since the 1920s. These Figure 1. The Gamba Complex of Protected Areas, Gabon, including sampling areas within the 2 national parks and the multiple-use area (1,Iguéla;2,Loango;3,Sette Cama;4,Rabi;5,Divangui;6,Echira;7,Center;8,Koumaga;9,Bongo Lakes;10,Nyanga;and 11,Moukalaba).
Conservation Biology Volume 28, No. 1, 2014
operations have increased accessibility, forest clearance, and habitat fragmentation, especially near oilfields. Although remnants of primary forest exist, most is mature secondary forest (Alonso et al. 2006). Only small parts of the MUA are covered in surface water (1.2% [Institut National de Cartographie 2003]) and herbs (6.4%); 90.7% is forested (Hansen et al. 2003). One controlled road mainly used by extractive industries accesses the MUA. At the time of study, the parks had no major roads and relatively little human activity relative to the MUA. The variety of relatively unaffected areas in the complex contributes to its diverse flora and fauna (Fisher 2004;Alonso et al. 2006;Harris et al. 2012) and makes it especially valuable for species of international conservation concern, such as the leatherback turtle (Dermochelys coriacea), western lowland gorilla (Gorilla gorilla gorilla), hippopotamus (Hippopotamus amphibius), and chimpanzee (Pan trogolodytes). The complex has one of the highest concentrations of African forest elephants, estimated at 11,205 (95% CI = 10,236 to 12,174) in 1999 (Thibault et al. 2001). Although historically Gabon had less elephant poaching than nearby countries (Barnes et al. 1995), poaching has become a serious problem leading the Gabonese government to elevate the elephant's conservation status to fully protect and create an antipoaching military unit. Although elephant poaching has been documented in the Gamba Complex (Thibault & Blaney 2003;R.B. and M.L., personal observation) until recently poaching pressure has been relatively low (Blake et al. 2007).

[SECTION] sampling
We collected dung samples at 6 MUA sites during the dry and wet seasons (June-August and November-December, respectively) in 2004. We sampled each site 1-4 times; visits were separated by at least 1 week (Fig. 1 & Table 1). For comparison, we collected samples at 5 sites in the national parks or their buffer zones during the transition between seasons (October). We collected dung estimated to be <3 d old and recorded GPS locations and circumferences of 1-3 intact boli. Samples were boiled to destroy pathogens and preserved as in Eggert et al. (2008).
Elephants appeared to be concentrated around water sources (Bongo, Echira, Koumaga) in June, and fresh dung samples were relatively rare at drier sites (Center, Divangui, Rabi). Because more samples were collected at wetter sites than planned, we genotyped a subset representing all collection dates, sites, and locations within sites (Table 1).

[SECTION] dna laboratory analyses
We used the method of Eggert et al. (2003) to extract DNA from dung in a separate lab from the one in which DNA was amplified. Extractions were accompanied by controls to ensure that reagents were free of contaminating DNA.
We optimized genetic markers with a preliminary set of 25 samples. We used primers MDL3/MDL5 (Fernando et al. 2000) to sequence 592 bp of the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) control region and amplify microsatellite loci FH67, FH19R, FH48R, FH60R, FH94R, LA6R (Comstock et al. 2000, Eggert et al. 2008), FH126 (Comstock et al. 2002), and LafMS02 (Nyakaana & Arctander 1998). In a UV-sterilized hood, we performed the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in 10 μL volumes containing 0.5 U AmpliTaq Gold DNA Polymerase, (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, U.S.A.), 1× AmpliTaq Buffer II, 0.4 μM labeled forward primer, 0.4 μM reverse primer, 2 mM MgCl 2 , 0.2 mM dNTPs, 1× BSA, and 1 μL DNA extract. The profile consisted of denaturation at 95 • C for 10 min, 45 cycles of denaturation at 95 • C for 45 s, annealing at locus-specific temperatures for 35 s, and primer extension at 72 • C for 35 s. Products were separated in an ABI 3100 automated sequencer (Applied Biosystems) and allele sizes were scored with GeneScan 2.7 and Genotyper 2.5 (Applied Biosystems). We used an African savanna elephant sample to standardize scoring and a negative control to detect PCR contamination.
Using the preliminary sample genotypes, we estimated genotyping error rates in RELIOTYPE (Miller et al. 2002). We estimated P(ID) random (the power to distinguish between random individuals) and P(ID) sibs (the power to distinguish siblings) (Waits et al. 2001) in GENALEX 6 (Peakall & Smouse 2006). Because elephants are often found in groups of relatives (Archie et al. 2006), we used P(ID) sibs to assess the power of our panel of loci.
For the remaining field samples, we developed a quality-control check to improve genotyping efficiency. Samples that did not amplify consistently at 5 of 8 loci within 2 attempts were eliminated. Retained samples were genotyped an additional 3 times. We included heterozygous genotypes in the data set after 2 matching scores and homozygous genotypes after 3 matching scores. This resulted in a high-quality data set and reduced costs. Sexes of individuals were determined genetically (Munshi-South et al. 2008). We inferred age class from bolus circumferences (circumference <32cm, juvenile; circumference >32 cm, adult) (Eggert et al. 2003).
We obtained mtDNA sequences from 48 individuals from Loango National Park, 30 individuals from Moukalaba-Doudou National Park, and 95 individuals from the MUA (59 dry season and 36 wet season). Sequences were obtained for both strands in an ABI 3100 automated sequencer (Applied Biosystems) and aligned with Sequencher 4.5 (Gene Codes, Ann Arbor, Michigan).

[SECTION] dna data analyses
We used the Excel Microsatellite Toolkit to compare genotypes (Park 2001). Those that matched at all loci were considered the same individual. When possible, we compared bolus circumferences and sexes to confirm results. For genotypes that differed at 1-3 loci, we verified the accuracy of the genotype before considering them different individuals. We used MICROCHECKER (van Oosterhout et al. 2004) to test for errors due to stuttering, large allele dropout, and null alleles. We grouped genotypes of unique individuals by collecting site, calculated allelic diversity, and expected and observed heterozygosity values and tested for deviations from expected heterozygosity values under Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE) and for linkage disequilibrium with GENEPOP (Raymond & Rousset 1997). We evaluated the significance of results after applying a Bonferroni correction for multiple tests.
To test for genetic subdivision at microsatellite loci within and between seasons, we conducted a hierarchical analysis of molecular variance (AMOVA) in ARLEQUIN (Schneider et al. 2000) with data assembled into 4 groups: MUA dry season, MUA wet season, Loango National Park and Moukalaba-Doudou National Park. Individuals sampled at multiple sites (n = 22 dry season, n = 4 wet season) were included in each site. We calculated pairwise genetic distances (F ST ) between MUA sites for each season and between MUA sites and park sites sampled in the transition season in ARLEQUIN and assessed significance with permutation tests after applying a Bonferroni correction. We tested for isolation by distance for each season with IBDWS (Jensen et al. 2005) and assessed significance after applying a Bonferroni correction.
When the AMOVA revealed significant differences among groups, we analyzed the microsatellite data in STRUCTURE 2.3.4 (Pritchard et al. 2000) to investigate genetic and geographic patterns. Using the admixture model with allele frequencies correlated among populations, we performed 10 runs each of K = 1-10. The burnin period was 100,000 repetitions followed by 1,000,000 repetitions. We examined each season separately and included data from the transition zone in the national parks For mtDNA sequence data, we calculated pairwise genetic distances (F ST ) between collection sites for each season in ARLEQUIN and assessed significance levels with permutation tests. For each season, we tested for isolation by distance with IBDWS and assessed significance after applying a Bonferroni correction. We performed an AMOVA in ARLEQUIN with the same groupings as the microsatellite data.

[SECTION] movement patterns and habitat use
Locations of recaptured genotypes were plotted in AR-CGIS 9.2 (ESRI, Redlands, CA) and used to evaluate movement distances and habitat use by season, sex, and age. To determine the proximity of samples to water sources, we used field notes, the national hydrological base map, and a digital elevation model (Jarvis et al. 2008). To estimate proximity to water (within 500 m), we used data only from the wet and dry seasons.
To examine habitat use, we assigned dung piles to 1 of 7 habitat types within 2 habitat categories: closed habitats (forest and riverine forest) or open habitats (forestsavanna edge, savanna, swamp, beach, or road). We used chi-square contingency tests in SPSS 19.0 (IBM, Armonk, New York) to examine associations between habitat category and sex and age classes.

[SECTION] results
We collected 1177 dung samples (Table 1). All 25 preliminary samples had unique genotypes. RELIOTYPE estimated the reliability of these genotypes at a probability of 98.9%. The values of P(ID) random (4.5 × 10 -12 ) and P(ID) sibs (1.7 × 10 -4 ) indicated that 8 loci provided sufficient power to distinguish individuals. At 5 loci, these values were 2.7 × 10 -7 and 5.1 × 10 -3 , respectively.
For the remaining samples, 70.5% of dry season, 77% of wet season, and 64% of park samples were successfully genotyped (Table 1). RELIOTYPE estimated the reliability of these genotypes at 98.5%. Of 412 genotypes obtained from dry-season samples, 299 were unique, 64 were recaptures within collecting session, and 49 were recaptures from other collecting sessions or sampling locations. Of 265 genotypes from wet season samples, 215 were unique, 42 were recaptures within collecting session, and 8 were recaptures from other collecting sessions or locations. Eleven individuals were captured in multiple seasons. In Loango, we detected 37 individuals in 40 samples, and in Moukalaba, we detected 27 individuals in 28 samples.
The sex ratio in the MUA was strongly female biased (dry season, χ 2 1 = 147.49, P < 0.001; wet season, χ 2 1 = 88.58, P < 0.001) (Table 2). In Loango and Moukalaba-Doudou, sex ratio did not differ from 50:50 (Loango: χ 2 2 = 0.15, P = 0.926; Moukalaba: χ 2 2 = 0.22, P = 0.895), although these results should be viewed with caution because sample sizes were smaller and sexes were not assigned unless confirmed within 3 attempts. We were able to estimate age for 79.9% of individuals in the dry season (n = 239), and 36.7% in the wet season (n = 76, Table 2). Nearly one-quarter (23.8%) were considered juveniles, although some young females may have been included in this group on the basis of our bolus circumference cutoff (32 cm).

[SECTION] nuclear microsatellites
We found no evidence for linkage disequilibrium. Results from MICROCHECKER suggested low-frequency null alleles at 5 of 8 loci in at least one group, but only LafMS02 appeared to have at least one null allele in all groups. Because it had high allelic diversity, this locus was useful in individual identification, and we retained it. When MUA genotypes were analyzed by collecting site, deviations from expected heterozygosity values were confined to a few loci at a few locations (Bongo, Echira, Koumaga for dry season; Center, Bongo, Echira, Koumaga for wet season). We found no deviations at any locus for samples from the parks. When we analyzed the MUA by season rather than collecting site, heterozygosity values deviated from expectations at most loci (Table 3).
We found no evidence for isolation by distance in either season (r dry = 0.1603, P = 0.2164, r wet = 0.2875, P = 0.0870). The AMOVA results indicated significant subdivision among the 4 groups, among populations within groups, and within populations (Supporting Information) but not between seasons in the MUA (F ST = 0.0049, Supporting Information). Pairwise F ST values revealed that Iguéla differed significantly from most sites in the MUA and Moukalaba-Doudou during both seasons and that Moukalaba differed from approximately half of the MUA sites during both seasons (Table 4).
Although STRUCTURE results revealed 3 genetic clusters in the dry season (Supporting Information) and the wet season (Supporting Information), there was no clear association between genetic clusters and geography for either season.

[SECTION] mitochondrial dna
Nine of the 16 mtDNA haplotypes we detected matched previously described haplotypes (Supporting Information), whereas 7, including the most common 2 (Gamba1, Gamba4) were unique (GenBank accession #KF638276-638282). The average pairwise difference between haplotypes was 6.46 (3.07) base pairs and nucleotide diversity was 1.12% (0.59).
Results of testing for isolation by distance were marginally significant in the dry season (r = 0.4790,  . These females were detected on different days at both sites, and their genotypes suggested they were unrelated. Most dung was found near large permanent bodies of water at Bongo, Koumaga, and Echira, especially in the dry season (Tables 1 &2). In the dry season, 72.9% of samples were found near water, whereas in the wet season 16.6% of samples were found near water. Males and females did not differ in proximity to water sources (both seasons: χ 2 1 = 0.08, n = 81 males, n = 435 females,  P = 0.79), either separately for each season or when only adults were considered (χ 2 1 = 1.18, n = 46 males, n = 198 females, P = 0.28). We found less dung at upland sites (Center and Rabi) and more dung in the wet than dry season. Divangui, an upland site with a small lake, had similar amounts of dung in both seasons; it was the only site where only females were found. A comparable number of males were sampled in both seasons, whereas more females were sampled in the dry than the wet season (Table 2).
During the dry season, males were more often associated with open habitats (84.6%, n = 39 males) than females (62.4%, n = 255 females; χ 2 1 = 7.40, P < 0.01), but females outnumbered males approximately 5:1 in open habitats. The gender difference in habitat use remained significant when only savannas and swamps were considered open habitats (χ 2 1 = 6.00, n = 31 males, n = 227 females, P < 0.05). We found no evidence for an association between sex and habitat category used during the wet season (χ 2 1 = 1.08, n = 39 males, n = 170 females, P = 0.30) or between adult (seasons combined, χ 2 1 = 0.66, n = 50 males, n = 203 females, P = 0.42) and juvenile elephants (seasons combined. χ 2 1 = 2.49, n = 13 males, n = 62 females, P = 0.12).

[SECTION] discussion
We detected over 500 elephants in the MUA during both seasons and in the national parks between seasons. Genetic diversity, as measured by haplotype diversity for mtDNA or allelic diversity and heterozygosity for microsatellites, was consistent with results of previous studies (Comstock et al. 2002;Johnson et al. 2007;Okello et al. 2008). Although there were no significant differences among expected or observed heterozygosity values in the MUA or parks, expected heterozygosity values for both seasons in the MUA were higher than in either park. Although the observed deviations from HWE in the MUA might be partially explained by low-frequency null alleles or genotyping error due to degraded DNA, our strict quality control measures minimized the probability of including erroneous genotypes in the data set. When considered with data on movement and population structure, the deviations suggest that elephants in the MUA did not represent a group of randomly mating individuals; rather, they suggest an assemblage of elephants from multiple populations and family groups.

[SECTION] population structure and movements of individuals
Although we did not detect population structure that correlated with differences between the MUA and the parks, we caution that this should not be interpreted as evidence that there has been no effect of land-use  changes on forest elephant movements. There is an inherent time lag in genetic signatures of change at the landscape level (Landguth et al. 2010). Assuming a generation time of 25 years for African forest elephants (Blanc 2008), petroleum extraction and logging activity occurred over 2-4 generations. Landguth et al. (2010) found that the lag time to barrier detection with genetic methods can be relatively short (1-15 generations) for mobile animals with large dispersal distances. However, their models do not include the effects of overlapping generations, and they caution that detecting the effects of fragmentation on long-lived species over time scales relevant to conservation may be difficult.
Within the MUA, we found no significant differentiation between populations in the wet and dry seasons, suggesting that this region supports a resident population. The higher levels of differentiation at maternally inherited mtDNA are likely the result of low female dispersal and relatively small female home ranges (Blake et al. 2008). Sites that were most genetically distinct at both mtDNA and biparentally inherited microsatellites were outside the MUA. Elephants from Iguéla differed in mtDNA from elephants at all other sites and in nuclear DNA from elephants at many sites in both seasons. Iguéla samples came from the well-patrolled northern end of Loango, which is isolated by a large lagoon. Telemetry studies of elephants in Iguéla reveal highly localized movements (Blake et al. 2008;Schuttler et al. 2012). Although both telemetry and dung data were derived from a small number of individuals (6 and 23, respectively), they suggest elephants in Iguéla may be resident to that area. Other sites in Loango or its buffer zone (Loango, Sette Cama) did not differ consistently from sites in the MUA, which suggests some movement and gene flow. Because these sites were sampled only in the transition season, we cannot rule out the possibility that differentiation might be detectable during the wet or dry seasons. However, results of Blake et al.'s (2008) studies over multiple seasons and parks showed that home ranges of forest elephants are generally small, suggesting that seasonality plays a role in short but not longer-distance movements (i.e., between parks).
During the dry season, elephants at Moukalaba (58-107 km from MUA sites, separated by mountains) did not differ at mtDNA or nuclear microsatellite DNA from elephants at most MUA sites, but during the wet season the Moukalaba elephants differed at maternally inherited mtDNA from most MUA elephants and at nuclear microsatellite DNA from elephants at Rabi, Center, and Koumaga. This suggests that elephants move into the MUA during the dry season and return to the Moukalaba region during the wet season. A similar pattern was observed for Nyanga, but the level of differentiation between elephants at Nyanga and elephants in the MUA was greater than that of elephants at Moukalaba at both  mitochondrial and nuclear DNA in the dry season. This pattern is supported by observations and GPS tracks of elephants moving along the coast from Nyanga through Setté Cama in the wet season (Kolowski et al. 2010) and congregating in the papyrus swamps around the Nyanga River in the dry season (M.L., personal observation). We speculate the Nyanga River swamps may sustain elephants from a different subgroup than those gathering around MUA water sources such as Bongo or Koumaga.

[SECTION] movement and site visitation
Although movement data were limited to 34 individuals, most movements were over short distances (approximately 30 km), mostly within the MUA. Only 3 covered longer distances: 1 AF moved from Iguéla to Koumaga (80 linear km), and 2 unrelated AF moved from Echira to Moukalaba (110 linear km). The other 91% of movements were limited to the MUA, most involved individuals moving into or between major water sources in the dry season (Koumaga-Echira, 30 linear km; Bongo-Echira, 45 linear km). We also detected most dung near large, permanent water sources (Bongo, Koumaga, Echira), which suggests high visitation, especially in the dry season. Wetlands are abundant in high-quality browse (Blake 2002), and seasonally flooded grasslands fringing wetlands may provide important grazing for forest elephants (Tchamba & Seme 1993), especially during the dry season (Buij et al. 2007). Our results further showed that males may be particularly attracted to wetlands and savannas, which could serve as important gathering spots in a resource-limited season and appear to play an important role in directing elephant movements to particular sites in particular seasons.

[SECTION] implications for wildlife management
We estimate that the MUA contains approximately onetenth of the global population of African forest elephants (approximately 100,000 in 2011 [Maisels et al. 2013]). Our genetic and movement data suggest the MUA provides year-round habitat for some individuals, particularly females, and additional habitat for elephants whose primary range is in the parks. The wetlands, lagoons, and lakes in the MUA provide critical, year-round resources and may serve as congregation points for elephants, providing an avenue for gene flow. Increasing infrastructure development, poor management of existing infrastructure, hunting pressure or forest fragmentation could impede such gene flow. We therefore recommend that critical water and food resources located outside the parks be fully protected. Although Bongo Lakes and Echira are in the process of being incorporated into Loango and Moukalaba-Doudou national parks, the Koumaga wetlands are not. We recommend protection for Setté Cama (in the buffer zone of Loango) and Divangui (designated by the logging company as a conservation zone), which appear to support elephant movements and are located on water sources. At the time of our study, protection for elephants and other wild species in the MUA may have been as good or better than the national parks, which were just being set up. Access to the MUA had been controlled for years by companies that prohibited hunting or transport of wildlife products (Laurence et al. 2006b). Since then, most of the MUA has been zoned for logging. Although logging operations hold government-approved sustainable management plans and are certified by the Forest Stewardship Council, the nature of their extractive operations, which include expanding road networks, will inevitably affect one of Gabon's last tracts of mature sedimentary-basin rainforest and its globally important population of elephants. Today, the MUA is in the process of having its partial-protection status removed except along park borders, including Bongo Lakes and Echira. evidence supports the fact that roads, and the size of roadless wilderness, are the most important variables defining the distribution and movement patterns of forest elephants in the MUA (Buij et al. 2007) and throughout the Congo Basin (Blake et al. 2008). If the MUA's protection status must be removed, replacing it with a new, legally enforceable mechanism, such as sustainable-development guidelines, should be a top priority.

