[SECTION] title
Genetic sampling for estimating density of common species

[SECTION] abstract
Understanding population dynamics requires reliable estimates of population density, yet this basic information is often surprisingly difficult to obtain. With rare or difficultto-capture species, genetic surveys from noninvasive collection of hair or scat has proved cost-efficient for estimating densities. Here, we explored whether noninvasive genetic sampling (NGS) also offers promise for sampling a relatively common species, the snowshoe hare (Lepus americanus Erxleben, 1777), in comparison with traditional live trapping. We optimized a protocol for single-session NGS sampling of hares. We compared spatial capture-recapture population estimates from live trapping to estimates derived from NGS, and assessed NGS costs. NGS provided population estimates similar to those derived from live trapping, but a higher density of sampling plots was required for NGS. The optimal NGS protocol for our study entailed deploying 160 sampling plots for 4 days and genotyping one pellet per plot. NGS laboratory costs ranged from approximately $670 to $3000 USD per field site. While live trapping does not incur laboratory costs, its field costs can be considerably higher than for NGS, especially when study sites are difficult to access. We conclude that NGS can work for common species, but that it will require field and laboratory pilot testing to develop cost-effective sampling protocols.

[SECTION] (no title)
. For species that are not easily trapped, NGS often yields larger sample sizes and is more cost-effective than trapping efforts because scat and other sources of noninvasive DNA data are comparatively easy to collect (e.g., Hedges, Johnson, Ahlering, Tyson, & Eggert, 2013). The question we take up here is whether NGS can be as effective as live trapping for estimating density of relatively abundant and trappable species such as common raccoons (Procyon lotor Linnaeus, 1758), Virginia opossums (Didelphis virginiana Kerr, 1792), and snowshoe hares (Lepus americanus Erxleben, 1777); we use the latter as a tractable model for comparing live-capture results and NGS data.
For many species, the fieldwork needed to collect noninvasive samples is cheaper and faster than live trapping, when both methods are used to obtain data over the same number of temporal sessions.
But NGS gains an additional (and often large) field cost advantage, especially with difficult-to-access sites, when the capture history for CMR analyses is built from DNA data collected during a single site visit. With live trapping, animals must be released from traps between each sampling session. In contrast, during a single NGS sampling session lasting days to weeks, animals can leave their genetic signatures at multiple "traps," generating spatial capture histories analogous to the temporal capture histories from live trapping. Spatial capturerecapture (SCR; Efford, 2004;Borchers & Efford, 2008) models are extensions of CMR that can be used for analyzing spatial capture histories from single-session surveys.
Obtaining reliable population estimates with NGS depends not only on the number of genetic samples collected from the field, but also on the proportion of those samples that yield correct genotypes.
To minimize genotyping errors and laboratory costs, field sampling must be designed to ensure genetic samples are fresh. Even then, two types of genotyping errors-false alleles and allelic dropout-can occur with the low quality and quantity of DNA available from NGS (Taberlet, Waits, & Luikart, 1999). Both error types can falsely inflate the number of unique individuals identified, leading to density estimates that are biased high (Waits & Leberg, 2000). These genotyping errors can be reduced through repeat amplification of genetic samples and reanalysis of samples with highly similar genotypes (Taberlet et al., 1996). Alternatively, density may be underestimated if the number and variability of molecular markers used in genotyping is inadequate to distinguish individuals, which may require sampling more loci to differentiate between even closely related individuals (Mills et al., 2000), again raising laboratory costs.
Laboratory costs for NGS studies are greater for common than rare species, because costs accrue based on the number of samples genotyped (Lukacs & Burnham, 2005;Marucco, Boitani, Pletscher, & Schwartz, 2011). Thus, NGS surveys for density estimation are primarily used for rare or difficult-to-capture species, where the method provides obvious advantages over live trapping. Few studies have assessed the reliability and cost of NGS surveys for common, readily catchable animals. To address this gap, we evaluated the costeffectiveness of a single-session NGS approach for estimating density of snowshoe hares, a common species in boreal forests of North America. We asked three questions to determine whether and when this NGS approach is a viable alternative to live trapping: (1) Can we obtain sufficient genetic samples from the field while meeting singlesession CMR assumptions of population closure and no un-modeled capture heterogeneity? (2) Can we achieve high genotyping success?
(3) Are density estimates from live trapping and NGS comparable? We also consider the cost-effectiveness of the two methods for obtaining analyzable capture histories.

[SECTION] | study species
Snowshoe hares are medium-sized herbivores widespread in montane and boreal forests of North America (Figure 1). In Canada and Alaska, the species' northern range, population densities may reach six hares per ha during the high phase of 10-year population cycles (Hodges, 2000a). In these northern boreal forests, population sizes of Canada lynx (Lynx canadensis Kerr, 1792) and other major predators closely track the population cycles of snowshoe hares. In the contiguous United States, snowshoe hare populations are less cyclic and densities rarely exceed 2.7 hares per ha (Hodges, 2000b). Snowshoe hares occupy overlapping home ranges that can cover 1.6-10.2 ha during the year. They are an important game species in many regions where they occur.

[SECTION] | study area
This work was implemented in summers 2006 and 2009 at nine 20ha sites in two study areas in Montana. Three sites were in Glacier National Park (Cheng, Hodges, & Mills, 2015) and six in Flathead National Forest west of Glacier NP (Hodges & Mills, 2008), both areas of more extensive sampling for other research questions. Five sites were used in a pilot study, and five sites (including one from the pilot study) were used in a field survey. We selected the sites to reflect a range of hare densities and forest types. Average monthly high temperatures for the study season ranged from 24° C to 27° C. Average monthly total precipitation ranged from 4.3 to 8.9 cm. F I G U R E 1 Snowshoe hare (Lepus americanus Erxleben, 1777). Photograph credit: Karen E. Hodges

[SECTION] | optimizing an ngs field protocol (pilot study)
First, we determined whether our NGS approach could yield sufficient fresh samples for reliable CMR-based population estimates. Because snowshoe hares deposit >500 pellets per day (Hodges, 1999), collection from the forest floor would be difficult in terms of determining which pellets and how many to collect; aging pellets is subjective, pellets might be missed, and defining independent samples would be tricky. Instead, we established specific sampling stations where we deployed baited 0.5-m 2 ground cloths that were left in the field for several days. Ground cloths ensured we obtained fresh hare pellets, which helped both with DNA amplification and with meeting the CMR assumption of "closure" of the population during sampling. Each 20ha (400 × 500 m) study site was divided into an 8 × 10 grid with 50-m spacing between plots, for a total of 80 NGS plots per site. This sampling design echoed our survey method for live trapping snowshoe hares.
A hare can deposit multiple pellets during a single visit to an NGS plot. Therefore, on each NGS plot, only pellets from different hares (determined by pellet genotypes) can be considered independent captures for CMR analyses. In optimizing our NGS field protocol, we therefore sought to increase the number of NGS plots with pellets, rather than to increase the number of pellets collected per plot. Independent captures from different plots could be increased by extending the number of sampling days, using attractive baits, or increasing the number of ground cloths per site. The first two options were evaluated during a pilot study, described below. The latter was assessed during our field survey, by doubling the number of sample plots at a subset of sites.

[SECTION] | pellet accumulation pilot study
In summer 2006, we pretested survey methods at five pilot study sites. We examined impacts of sampling duration by counting how many NGS plots at each site had pellets after 1-5 days of sampling. To compare bait efficacy, at each site we randomly assigned one of three bait types (apples, oats, alfalfa) to each plot. We used a Kruskal-Wallis rank sum analysis to test for differences among bait types in the percentage of plots that accumulated pellets.

[SECTION] | pellet decomposition pilot study
Genotyping success declines with the time samples are left in the field, because DNA degradation increases with temperature, moisture, and exposure to ultraviolet radiation (Murphy, Kendall, Robinson, & Waits, 2007). An optimal NGS sampling duration would be long enough to collect many pellets, but short enough to ensure high genotyping success. Therefore, simultaneous with determining pellet accumulation rates in the field, we conducted a study of how quickly hare pellet DNA degrades with field exposure.
Degraded DNA can manifest as low PCR amplification success or high genotyping error rates. Estimating genotyping error rates often relies on comparison with reference genotypes from high-quality DNA sources (Broquet & Petit, 2004). To quantify genotyping error rates for different-aged pellets, we collected an ear tissue sample (reference genotype) and pellets from each of 18 snowshoe hares captured at two pilot study sites. The pellets were obtained from the floors of live-traps that contained the captured hares. At the time of collection, these pellets could have been up to 12 hrs old (traps were open overnight). We transferred the pellets to a forest near our base camp. At 0, 2, 4, and 6 days postcapture, we selected up to three pellets from each hare's pellet pile for genetic analysis. Once selected, pellets were stored in 95% alcohol in a -20°C freezer until extraction, which occurred within 6 months of collection.
We used Qiagen DNeasy Blood & Tissue Kits to extract DNA from the 18 hare tissue samples. The pellet samples were extracted with QIAamp DNA Stool Mini Kits, in a separate laboratory at University of Montana designated exclusively for low quality DNA samples collected noninvasively. All samples were genotyped at eight highly variable microsatellite loci originally developed in the European rabbit, Oryctolagus cuniculus Linnaeus, 1758, and successfully used with snowshoe hares (Burton, Krebs, & Taylor, 2002;Cheng, Hodges, Melo-Ferreira, Alves, & Mills, 2014;Schwartz, Luikart et al, 2007;Schwartz, Pilgrim, McKelvey, Rivera, & Ruggiero, 2007). PCR amplifications were run on an ABI 3130xl Genetic Analyzer (Murdoch DNA Sequencing Facility; Missoula, MT) and scored with GENEMAPPER v. 3.7 (Applied Biosystems Inc., Foster City, CA, USA). We manually checked all microsatellite genotypes to confirm allele calls. Sample extraction and PCR conditions are described in Cheng et al. (2014). PCR amplifications of the eight loci were combined into three multiplex reactions, and each tissue and decomposition pellet sample was amplified four times across all loci.
For each pellet age class, we calculated nonamplification as the proportion of PCR attempts in which a sample locus did not yield any genotype. Nonamplification rates were averaged across all loci, samples and PCRs. Using the corresponding tissue samples as reference genotypes, we calculated allelic dropout rates, false allele rates, and base shift error rates averaged across all loci, samples and PCRs for each pellet age class (Program GIMLET v1.3.3;Valiere, 2002). Allelic dropout was observed when a heterozygote was typed as a homozygote. A false allele occurred when slippage during PCR generated an additional erroneous allele. Base shift errors were small shifts in allele size-typically a one-base pair increase or decrease. Because calculations used different denominators, error rates could not be summed to yield total error rate for each pellet age class (Broquet & Petit, 2004).

[SECTION] | collecting live-trap and ngs data (field survey)
After optimizing an NGS protocol based on the pilot study, we conducted live trapping and NGS at two sites in Glacier NP in 2006 and at three sites in Flathead National Forest in 2009. At each site, live trapping and genetic sampling occurred sequentially within 2 weeks and in random order (i.e., live trapping then genetic sampling or the reverse).
Significant differences in population estimates are attributable to differences in the survey methods rather than to changes in hare density within this short time.

[SECTION] | live trapping
At each site for the field survey, we placed 80 Tomahawk live-traps in the same 8 × 10 grid configuration described for the pilot study. Each site was trapped for three to five nights. Traps were opened every evening and baited with apple and alfalfa and then checked the following morning. Captured hares were weighed, sexed, and ear tagged.
We used sterile 3-mm biopsy punches to collect a small piece of ear tissue from each hare for genetic analyses. All hare handling was approved by the University of Montana's IACUC. Ear tissue samples were stored in silica gel until return from the field, at which point they were frozen to -20°C.

[SECTION] | noninvasive genetic sampling
Noninvasive genetic sampling followed a refined protocol developed from our pilot work. At each of the 80 grid points, we baited a 0.5-m 2 ground cloth with two to three commercially produced alfalfa cubes that were 2.5 to 5 cm per side. We returned 4 days later to collect all pellets that had accumulated on the ground cloths. At the three Flathead sites, we also tested the efficacy of using 160 cloths, placing the additional cloths halfway between the main sampling plots.

[SECTION] | genotyping and error-checking genetic samples
We genotyped all tissue genetic samples collected from live-trapped hares. For each tissue sample, a "consensus genotype" was confirmed when two independent PCR amplifications yielded the same genotype. From confirmed tissue genotypes, we estimated allele frequencies, heterozygosities, and probability of identity (PID and PID sib ) by locus, using Program GIMLET. PID is the probability that two individuals (or siblings, for PID sib ) drawn from the population have identical confirmed genotypes. The PID and PID sib were determined by multiplying the eight locus-specific estimates.
Genotyping all pellets collected by NGS would have been expensive and likely redundant. Multiple pellets from one hare's visit would be quite possible (Hodges & Sinclair, 2005). But if the multiple pellets on a single plot were instead from different hares, we would lose important capture information if we genotyped only one pellet per plot. As a compromise to minimize laboratory costs while maximizing potential capture rates, we genotyped up to four randomly selected pellets from each NGS plot. When plots had four or fewer pellets, all were genotyped.
For each NGS pellet selected, we determined a "consensus genotype" based on a stringent error-checking protocol. Pellet samples with <40% amplification success, across eight microsatellite loci, in the first two PCR runs were omitted from further analysis. We then used a three-stage approach and mismatch comparisons, modified from Waits and Paetkau (2005), to confirm a consensus genotype for each sample. A sample was designated a confirmed homozygote at a locus if it amplified as a clear homozygote in at least four PCRs with no discrepancies, and as a confirmed heterozygote if each allele amplified clearly in at least two PCRs with no discrepancies. If a genotype was confirmed at all loci, or if the eight-locus genotype matched that of another genetic sample collected from the same site, the eight-locus genotype was the sample's consensus genotype. Each sample was amplified up to six times per locus.

[SECTION] | comparing live-trap and ngs density estimates from field surveys
We applied maximum-likelihood spatial capture-recapture models, implemented in the R package "secr" (Efford, 2016), to estimate densities separately from live-trap and NGS data for each study site.
For SCR analysis, we assumed animal activity centers were distributed according to a homogeneous point process and detection probability followed a half-normal function. NGS plots were modeled as single occasion proximity detectors, which allowed individuals to be captured at multiple detectors during a survey occasion, but at each detector an individual was counted only once. We modeled live-traps as multicatch traps, a substitution that is minimally biased (Efford, 2016), because a single-catch likelihood is not available with maximum-likelihood estimation in "secr." For live-trap data, we used Akaike's Information Criterion for small sample sizes (AICc) to rank support for three detection models: The null model, a model that included capture-related behavioral effects (e.g., trap shyness), and a two-class mixture model allowing for two groups with different detection probabilities (e.g., males vs. females or adults vs. juveniles). For the NGS data, we used AICc to rank support for the null and two-class mixture models. The behavioral model was not applicable because there was only one survey occasion. We set an integration buffer width of 600 m, which exceeds the minimum recommended width of three times the σ parameter (a spatial scale parameter that describes how quickly detection probability declines as the distance between a trap and an animal's activity center increases) estimated from the data (Royle, Chandler, Sollman, & Gardner, 2013).
To examine how density estimates are influenced by the number of pellets genotyped per plot, we analyzed data from 500 iterations each of computer-generated subsampling of one or two pellets per plot, randomly selected from the four-pellet NGS dataset. We also tested three and four pellets per plot, but results were very similar to two pellets per plot, so are not reported. For each level of pellet sampling, the median of the density estimates and the median of the 95% confidence intervals from estimable iterations (capture histories with at least one recapture) were compared to estimates from live-trap data. When there are no recaptures, SCR model parameters are not identifiable.

[SECTION] | comparing live trapping and ngs through simulation
To compare the accuracy and precision of estimates from live-trap versus NGS methods, for different hare densities and with different assumptions about the movement distances of hares, we simulated 500 iterations of 135 scenarios modeled after our study system. Using SCR model formulation, we simulated five sampling approaches: for The 500 simulated capture histories for each scenario were analyzed as described above for the empirical data. We calculated the following summary metrics to compare density estimates from the simulated live-trap versus NGS approach:
1. Proportion of estimable iterations, measured as the proportion of 500 iterations with at least one recapture. Only estimable iterations were included in other summary metrics. If fewer than 10% of iterations were estimable for any simulated scenario, summary metrics were not calculated.

[SECTION] 2.
Root mean square error, a combined measure of bias and variance, calculated as
, where D is estimated density, D is true density, and n is the number of iterations.

[SECTION] 3.
Median coefficient of variation across iterations, with the coefficient of variation for each iteration calculated as the estimated standard error divided by estimated density.

[SECTION] 4.
Confidence interval coverage, which was the proportion of iterations in which the 95% confidence interval included the simulated (true) parameter value.

[SECTION] | optimizing an ngs field protocol (pilot study)
After 1 day of sampling, 13 ± 2.1% (SD) of plots at pilot study sites had hare pellets (Figure 2). The number of plots with pellets increased most rapidly during the first 2 days of sampling. By the fifth day of sampling, 37.2 ± 7.2% of plots had at least one pellet. Per-locus genotyping error rates increased with the number of days pellets were left in the field (Figure 3). Averaged across the eight loci, only a small percentage of 0-day-old pellets did not amplify at a locus (7%), but 71% of 6-day-old pellets did not amplify at a locus. When genotypes did amplify at a locus, allelic dropout was the most common type of genotyping error (Figure 3).
The three baits (apples, oats, and alfalfa) were similar at attracting hares to sampling plots (χ 2 = 1.31, df = 2, p = .52). Alfalfa was easiest to handle and minimized disturbance to plots (most commonly, deer attracted to apples). Our final NGS protocol used 4 days of sampling with alfalfa as bait. The nonamplification rate for 4-day-old pellets was almost 50%, but a majority of the pellets collected after 4 sampling days would be <4 days old.

[SECTION] | collecting live-trap and ngs data (field survey)
From 119 live-trap captures of snowshoe hares across the five study sites, we identified 72 unique individuals (Table 1). The average number of live-trap captures per site was 23.8 (SD = 14.5), and the average number of unique individuals per site was 14.4 (SD = 10.0). We collected 488 snowshoe hare pellets from ground cloths (Table 2). Eighty percent of sampling plots had no hare pellets, but variation among sites was high. On average, 7% of sampling plots at each site had one pellet; 4%, two pellets; 2%, three pellets; and 7% had four or more pellets. At the three Flathead sites, the proportion of plots with pellets was similar when considering the 80 main plots versus all 160 plots.
One site (Flathead 2) had 2 days of rain during the 4-day pellet accumulation period, but we did not observe a clear negative impact of rain on pellet numbers or PCR success (i.e., some other sites without rain had fewer pellets or lower PCR success than Flathead 2).

[SECTION] | genotyping and error-checking genetic samples from field surveys
We obtained and successfully genotyped genetic samples from 85%
(N = 61) of the 72 live-trapped hares. The 11 missing genetic samples were primarily due to hares escaping before samples could be obtained. Based on tissue samples, average observed heterozygosity for the eight loci was 0.71 (SD = 0.19; Table 3). The number of alleles per locus ranged from four (SOL33) to 29 (SOL30). Overall PID, calculated as the product of the locus-specific values, was 1.8 × 10 -10 and PID sib was 8.9 × 10 -4 .
Across the five study sites, 55% (N = 269) of the 488 pellets collected by NGS were genotyped, of which 210 (78%) amplified and yielded consensus genotypes. We conducted an average of 4.6 PCR runs per pellet. After error checking, 87% of pellet samples had genotypes that could be matched to another pellet or to a tissue genotype from a hare live-trapped at the same site. The consensus genotypes for three pellets (of 210) differed from another sample at only one locus. After additional independent PCRs, we concluded the consensus genotypes for these pellets represented unique individuals. For 3% of sampling plots, we confirmed pellet genotypes for two unique hares; for 1.1% of plots, three unique hares.

[SECTION] | comparing live-trap and ngs density estimates
At all sites, for both live-trap and NGS data, the null model was the highest ranked SCR model, with at least 75% AICc weight. The 95% CI for hare density estimates overlapped substantially among methods (Figure 4). Confidence intervals were usually largest for 80-plot NGS sampling. Unusually large 95% CI's corresponded with recapture rates <20% (Table 4). Sampling one versus two pellets per plot for genotyping had little influence on density estimates (Figure 4).
No SCR detection parameters were consistently higher or lower across sites for a particular sampling method (live-trap vs. NGS).
Excluding Flathead2 80-plot NGS, the average g0 (detection probability at activity center) was 0.09 and ranged from 0.03 to 0.24 for all sites and methods. The parameter σ averaged 57.6 m and ranged from 22.1 to 98.4 m. SCR detection parameter estimates for Flathead2 80-plot NGS were unusual, with a very high g0 of 1.0 and small σ estimates (18.1-19.9), yet still yielding density estimates similar to live trapping.

[SECTION] | comparing live trapping and ngs through simulation
In simulations, live trapping and 160-plot NGS produced more accurate and precise density estimates than did 80-plot NGS. As with the field data, the number of pellets genotyped had little influence on estimates. At the smallest σ (20 m), hare density often could not be estimated, was biased low, or had a large 95% CI (Figure 5). Density estimates were also poor when low detection (g0 = 0.05) resulted in few individuals captured or a low proportion of recaptures, even if simulated hare densities were moderate to high (Appendix S1). Regardless of survey method, when unique captures exceeded 20 individuals and at least 20% of captured animals were recaptured, density estimates were generally unbiased and close to true values (Appendix S1).
T A B L E 1 Live-trap hare captures Root-mean-square error and coefficient of variation were often smaller with live trapping and 160-plot NGS compared to 80-plot NGS, except at the smallest σ simulated (Appendix S2). Root-mean-square error declined as density declined, and as g0 or σ increased. Coefficient of variation declined as density, g0, or σ increased. Confidence interval coverage was close to 95% except for 80-plot NGS at the lowest g0 or smallest σ.

[SECTION] | discussion
Single-session NGS was a viable alternative to multiple-session live trapping for estimating densities of snowshoe hares under a range of field and simulation conditions. When detection probability was very low or hare movements limited, additional sampling plots were required for NGS to yield density estimates comparable to live trapping. Increasing the density of NGS plots at a site is relatively easy and cheap, and an important benefit of NGS is that all genetic samples can be collected in a single site revisit, compared to the multiple survey nights required with live trapping. NGS density estimates should also be improved by increasing the number of survey sessions, but this option may be more expensive than increasing sampling plots and was not evaluated in this study.

[SECTION] | optimizing an ngs protocol
Studies addressing effects of environmental exposure on DNA degradation have suggested that NGS samples should be collected within a few days to a week of deposition, but in some cold and dry environments, samples up 1 month old still had reasonable (>60%) genotyping success (Murphy et al., 2007;Piggott, 2004;Stetz, Seitz, & Sawaya, 2015). We identified an optimal NGS sampling duration of 4 days for snowshoe hare pellets. Our 80% genotyping success was relatively high for NGS (Marucco et al., 2011). The proportion of sampling plots with pellets increased steadily over the 4 days. With a sampling density of 160 plots per site, this duration usually yielded sufficient samples for reliable population estimates. These results are specific to our study species, sampling design, and survey conditions (e.g., timing of sampling and weather), so we recommend that other researchers conduct similar presurvey testing prior to conducting NGS population estimates. For example, sampling duration may need to be reduced for surveys conducted in warmer and wetter months or sites, due to lower genotyping success.
Nonamplification rates increased rapidly with pellet age over 4 days of sampling. Genotyping success could be further improved by limiting sampling duration to 2 or 3 days, while increasing the density of sampling plots to maintain similar capture and recapture numbers.
A shorter sampling duration could reduce per-sample laboratory costs, as fewer PCR runs could be required to obtain reliable consensus genotypes. Eliminating the most problematic loci (those with the lowest amplification success and highest error rates) could also reduce costs while potentially improving density estimates, provided the remaining loci are sufficiently variable to minimize error due to the "shadow effect" (Mills et al., 2000).

[SECTION] | comparing density estimates among survey methods
In field and simulation studies, we compared the accuracy and precision of density estimates from live trapping, 80-plot NGS, and 160-plot NGS. The number of pellets genotyped per NGS plot had little influence on density estimates. This finding is not surprising, as multiple pellets on a single plot often arose from just one individual;
we focus on one-pellet results hereafter.
Previous studies on multiple-session CMR surveys demonstrated that when trap spacing is more than twice the value of σ, SCR estimates may be poor (Sollmann, Gardner, & Belant, 2012;Sun, Fuller, & Royle, 2014). Our simulations corroborated these findings. At the lowest σ simulated (20 m), trap spacing exceeded individual hare movement distances, recaptures were rare, and all methods performed poorly.
For higher σ, live trapping and 160-plot NGS density estimates were unbiased and precision was comparable. However, density estimates from 80-plot NGS were sometimes still biased and almost always had larger 95% CI's than the other methods did.
In multiple-session live trapping, a recapture can occur at the same trap on different trap nights, although that kind of recapture alone does not provide the spatial information necessary to estimate the detection parameters in a SCR model. With single-session NGS, a recapture occurs only when an animal is detected at different plots. This distinction may explain why a higher density of NGS plots (160 instead of 80) was required to achieve density estimates comparable with live trapping at low σ.
Differences in recapture and initial capture rates underpinned differences in density estimates among survey methods, most evident at low g0 or σ. Density estimates were highly variable, sometimes greatly exceeded true simulated densities, and had large 95% CI's when there were few recaptures (<~20%). In simulations, recapture rates were almost always lower for 80-plot NGS than for live trapping or 160-plot NGS. This result is intuitive, as live trapping occurred over multiple occasions, and sampling density in the 160-plot design was twice as high as in the 80-plot scenario. Field results were consistent with these findings-the three cases with large 95% CI's (one live-trap and two 80-plot NGS) had <20% recaptures.
Simulations also identified a target threshold for initial captures.
When fewer than ~20 unique individuals were captured (unless low captures were due to low densities), estimated density was frequently biased low. Similarly, White, Anderson, Burnham, and Otis (1982) recommended at least 20 unique individuals and 30% capture probability for reliable CMR estimates. Live trapping surveys have no laboratory costs but entail higher field costs, because of the high number of site visits (our protocol involved opening traps at night and checking traps the following morning, for three to five nights of trapping) and more time and labor required to deploy live-traps than NGS cloths. In our case, the genetic surveys would take about 8-12 person hours in the field (two people× two visits × two to three hours per visit), whereas trapping would take anywhere from 30 person hours on our easiest sites (nine person hours to set out traps, nine person hours to collect them, three evenings × two person hours to set traps, and three mornings × two person hours to check traps) to 80-1120 hrs for harder sites (more brush, deadfall, hill, or further from roads), sites with more hares to handle, or for more nights of trapping. If surveying backcountry study sites, the additional time and expense of overnight stays for live trapping could be even more considerable. At an hourly wage of $10, the costs would become $80 to $120 for the field time for the genetic survey, and anywhere from $300 to $1200 for live trapping each site, plus all the additional gasoline for the repeat site visits. These simple cost estimates suggest that when hares are very abundant or laboratory costs expensive, live trapping may be more cost-effective, but that harder sites to navigate or sites with few hares may be more efficiently sampled via the NGS pellet protocol.

[SECTION] | cost-effectiveness of live trapping versus ngs
In wildlife studies, issues other than cost and the reliability of population estimates are often important for evaluating the costeffectiveness of survey methods. If studies require the additional data that live-captures afford (e.g., age or body mass information, opportunities for radio-collaring, or blood or tissue biopsies for disease work), then this approach to population estimation makes more sense than employing an NGS approach. On the other hand, NGS has the huge advantage of being noninvasive and less disruptive to wildlife populations, and often less visible in the field, which is advantageous in areas with many tourists, such as national parks.

[SECTION] | conclusions
Surprisingly few comparisons have been made between traditional trap-based and noninvasive estimates of density, and to our knowledge, none have asked whether noninvasive genetic methods can be cost-efficient for surveying relatively common and easily trappable species such as snowshoe hares. These questions are increasingly relevant because the downsides of noninvasive genetic sampling have been rapidly decreasing with improved laboratory and analytical techniques.
Our comparison of NGS and live trapping for snowshoe hares shows that NGS could indeed be viable. Our pilot work was essential for determining an appropriate trade-off in the collecting period between acquiring more pellets and avoiding excessive pellet degradation. We also found that increasing the sampling density (from 80 to 160 cloths per site) greatly improved NGS results. Both live trapping and NGS methods suffer when recapture rates are low. We encourage researchers contemplating an NGS approach to calculate a cost comparison between methods for their study system; NGS does have much lower field costs, but those need to be weighed against laboratory costs, which increase with hare density.
====================================================================================================
FILE: Sharing data improves monitoring of trans-boundary populations the case of wolverines in central Sca.grobid.tei (1).xml
====================================================================================================

[SECTION] title
N/A

[SECTION] sharing data improves monitoring of trans-boundary populations: the case of wolverines in central scandinavia
Vincenzo Gervasi, Henrik Brøseth, Olivier Gimenez, Erlend B. Nilsen, John Odden, Øystein Flagstad and John D. C. Linnell V. Gervasi (vincenzo.gervasi@nina.no), H. Brøseth,E. B. Nilsen,J. Odden,Ø. Flagstad and J. D. C. Linnell,Norwegian Inst. for Nature Research,PO Box 5685 Sluppen,Høgskoleringen 9,Norway. -O. Gimenez, CEFE UMR 5175, CNRS -Univ. de Montpellier -Univ. Paul-Valéry Montpellier -EPHE, 1919 Route de Mende, FR-34293 Montpellier Cedex 5, France Populations of wide-ranging species are likely to extend across multiple jurisdictions, including national and international borders. This requires that local institutions implement data sharing and a standardization of monitoring designs. However, a formal evaluation of the benefits of integrated monitoring systems had not, of yet, been performed. Using the wolverines in central Scandinavia as a study case, we assessed the benefits of data sharing for the monitoring of trans-boundary populations. We also assessed the performance of two demographic monitoring systems, one relying on a count of reproductive units, the other resulting from non-invasive genetic sampling and capture-recapture modeling. Sharing data across the border between Norway and Sweden allowed a strong increase in the precision of population size, population growth rate and vital rates estimates. It also allowed revealing that the probability to emigrate from Sweden to Norway was significantly higher than in the opposite direction, a required condition for the existence of a source-sink dynamics. These findings would have been impossible without trans-boundary data sharing. While the den count monitoring provided an estimated population growth of 138% over the 12-year period, the DNA-based estimate was only 72%. A positive trend likely occurred in the detectability of wolverine dens during the first years of the study, and the index was not able to separate the actual demographic trend from the trend in the system's ability to detect reproductions, thus providing positively biased estimates of population growth rate during the initial phase of the study. Data sharing is a crucial need for the study of the processes occurring in trans-boundary populations. It should be enhanced wherever trans-boundary ecological processes occur. Also, managers should be aware that count-based monitoring has a risk of overestimating population growth during the first years after its implementation.
Large carnivores are wide ranging species, which live at relatively low population densities (Carbone and Gittleman 2002), and usually use large exclusive territories (Nilsen et al. 2005). They also exhibit long dispersal distances, which allow single individuals to colonize areas several hundred kilometers away from their natal range (Santini et al. 2013). Viable large carnivore populations are therefore bound to occupy huge areas, and given the administrative and political fragmentation of the landscape (especially in Europe) they are likely to extend across multiple jurisdictions, including international borders (Chapron et al. 2014).
Although international conventions set a common framework for their conservation and management, in practice large carnivores are managed at the national and regional level, with local institutions being responsible for their demographic monitoring, for implementing actions, and for evaluating them. Such a tendency has been recently strengthened by the increasing focus on decentralization and devolution of natural resource management to local levels (Linnell 2015). A clear mismatch exists, therefore, between the scale of the ecological processes occurring in large carnivore populations and the scale of their current management and monitoring system.
The existence of populations across national borders requires that different national institutions promote and implement trans-boundary data sharing and a standardization of monitoring designs. Such integration is slowly advancing between several countries sharing large carnivore populations, and it has been advocated on the grounds of allowing harmonization in management, better inter-institutional communication, and an increased awareness about population status and trend (Linnell et al. 2008). Still, a formal evaluation of the relative performance of integrated versus isolated monitoring systems for trans-boundary populations has not, of yet, been performed.
With respect to how the monitoring is conducted, an additional challenge is posed by the fact that large carnivores  (Landa et al. 1998, Kindberg et al. 2009). Indices offer the advantage of being often easier and cheaper to produce, but they lack any formal treatment of the underlying detection process, and are therefore highly sensitive to temporal variation in sampling effort and/or sampling conditions (Yoccoz et al. 2001). They also do not allow an exploration of the mechanisms behind population performance, for example through the estimation of population vital rates.
They are also particularly prone to overestimating population rate of change in the first years of their implementation, due to the risk of confounding population and detection trends (Gervasi et al. 2014). Non-invasive genetic sampling, often coupled with the application of capture-recapture models (Lebreton et al. 1992), requires a higher resource investment, but it enhances the transparency of the monitoring system and places it in a robust probabilistic context. The tradeoff between cost and performance is therefore one of the most important issues when setting up a monitoring program for rare and elusive species.
Using the case of the wolverine Gulo gulo in the Scandinavian Peninsula, we explore the two above mentioned questions: 1) we produce an empirical assessment of the benefits deriving from data sharing for the demographic monitoring of trans-boundary populations of elusive species; 2) we assess the relative performance of two demographic monitoring systems, one relying on a simple count-based index of population trend, the other resulting from a long-term noninvasive genetic sampling and the application of capturerecapture models.
Wolverines are solitary large carnivores, distributed in the northern boreal forests of Eurasia and North America, where they usually live at low densities as opportunistic predators and facultative scavengers (Mattisson et al. 2011). The Scandinavian wolverine population declined drastically during the 1900s due to human persecution, and it was considered functionally extinct in southern Norway at the beginning of 1970s (Landa et al. 1997). It then started to recover its former numbers and distribution (Flagstad et al. 2004). Today, around 1000 wolverines live in Scandinavia (Persson and Brøseth 2011), with a distribution which embraces Norway, Sweden and Finland, and has further connections with Russia.
Despite being trans-boundary in nature, the population has been monitored and managed separately and differently on the two sides of the border dividing the Norwegian and the Swedish portions of the population. A process of integration between the two national monitoring programs has been on-going in the last few years, which has led to a progressive standardization of monitoring procedures and to a higher degree of data sharing. Also, since 2002 the southern portion of the population has been monitored in the two countries both by a minimum count of natal dens (Landa et al. 1998), and by a large-scale collection of scats on snow, followed by DNA extraction and individual identification (Taberlet et al. 1996).
Taking advantage of this analytical framework, we produced population size and growth rate estimates for the period 2003-2013, using both cumulative counts of natal dens and non-invasive genetic sampling. We compared the results in terms of relative consistency, and assessed that the inability of the count-based monitoring to cope with a positive temporal trend in detectability caused a bias in the estimation of population growth rate. We also simulated the scenarios of two national versus one trans-national monitoring program, and empirically document that data sharing provides better insights into the ecological process occurring in trans-boundary populations.

[SECTION] den sampling and minimum population size estimation
Wolverine natal dens usually consist of a system of snow tunnels, allowing access to a rock cavity, a talus slope, or simply to a sheltered slope where snow accumulates (May et al. 2012). Adult females start using the den in late January, just before giving birth, and usually abandon it at the latest at the beginning of May, when cubs are able to start accompanying them (Inman et al. 2012). Although the den itself is just a temporary construction, which disappears when the snow melts, females tend to reuse the same area in subsequent years (Landa et al. 1998). Moreover, the same denning area can be inherited for several generations, given that female wolverines are to a large extent philopatric (Chapell et al. 2004).
Since 1996, the minimum size of the Scandinavian wolverine population has been monitored both in Norway and in Sweden through cumulative counts of reproductive units at natal dens. As part of the National Large Predator Monitoring Programs, wardens from the State Nature Inspectorate in Norway and from the Environmental Protection Agency in Sweden searched for natal dens in the study population each winter and spring, to obtain a minimum count of the number of reproductive females. Then, based on the assumption that the proportion of reproductive females in the population stays constant, the average count in a window of three years was extrapolated to a minimum population size estimate (Landa et al. 1998, Brøseth et al. 2010). Hence, the estimates have been based on no formal treatment of the probability to detect a wolverine den in the study area, and the proportion of undetected dens is unknown.
Throughout the period 1996-2013, each time a wolverine den was found, its coordinates were included in a national database (< www.rovbase.no >, < www.rovbase.se >) and the site was checked for possible new reproductions in subsequent years. Thus, the monitoring system has been each year taking advantage of the information acquired during previous winters, leading to a potential increasing ability to detect the study species. The increasing temporal trend in the number of known wolverine den sites is shown in Fig. 1.

[SECTION] dna sampling and genotyping
Starting in 2002, a protocol of non-invasive genetic sampling, based on scat collection, has been implemented in Norway and Sweden, south of the E14 highway that crosses the whole Scandinavian Peninsula from the North Atlantic Ocean to the Baltic Sea (Fig. 2). A similar protocol has been progressively employed also in the northern part of the peninsula after 2008, but less systematically in Sweden than in Norway. Given the shorter time series available and the spatio-temporal heterogeneity in sampling effort, we decided not to use data from the northern portion of the study area for this study, but limited it to the wolverines detected south of the E14 highway during the period 2002-2013. This resulted in a dataset of 3652 genetic samples, belonging to 619 individual wolverines.
Scat samples were collected on snow along wolverine tracks, during a three month period from mid-February to mid-May, after the end of the hunting season and before cubs of the year started accompanying their mother away from the den. This ensured that all collected scats were from individuals one year old or older. In Norway, all the sampling  tissue samples (Hedmark et al. 2004). More than 200 singlelocus genotypes were tested, and three replicates were always sufficient for deriving the correct genotype. The same rigid use of predefined criteria for accepting single-locus consensus genotypes in this study suggests that most errors -if not all -were eliminated from the data set prior to formal analysis. As an additional quality control, a quality index was calculated for individuals that were only represented with one single sample (Miquel et al. 2006). All samples with QI  0.8 were discarded from the data set. The resulting annual success rate of the genetic identification protocol was of 61% (53-72%), which is comparable to what was obtained in a pilot project on non-invasive genotyping of Scandinavian wolverines (Hedmark et al. 2004).
For sex determination, two Y-chromosome specific markers that had been validated by scat sampling from 16 radio-marked individuals (1 male, 15 females) were used (DBY3Ggu, DBY7Ggu; Hedmark et al. 2004). Each of the Y-linked markers were amplified twice, leading to four replicates for all scat samples with respect to sex determination. Over the years, many samples have been collected from a large proportion of the individuals. This has provided an extensive database of individuals of known sex, offering an additional opportunity to assess the reliability of the sex markers. The error rate for individuals of know sex has been negligible, occurring in  1% of all sex-determined scat samples.

[SECTION] legal harvest and recovery data
Norway and Sweden apply different management regimes to the portion of the Scandinavian wolverine population that falls within their borders. Being part of the European Union, Sweden is bound by the Habitats Directive 92/43, in which wolverines are listed as strictly protected (annex IV). Hence, very limited legal control of wolverines has occurred in Sweden during the study period, and always under Article 16 derogations of the Directive. Norway is not an EU member and is not bound to the same set of regulations. To limit population size and the extent of depredation on free-ranging sheep and semi-domestic reindeer, wolverines in Norway are therefore subject to intensive culling. A quota-based hunting is allowed from mid-September to mid-February, which removes on average about 20 individuals each year (Bischof et al. 2012). Moreover, regional management authorities can authorize a number of additional removals by SNO officers, in case an intense livestock depredation has been occurring, or if the estimated population size is above the national management goals. As a result, about 300 wolverines have been legally shot in southern Norway and delivered to the authorities between 2002 and 2013. From all of them, we sampled muscle tissue for genetic identification, and extracted an upper premolar to determine the age of the dead individual (Landa and Skogland 1995).

[SECTION] capture-recapture modeling
To assess if data sharing provides analytical benefits for the demographic monitoring of trans-boundary populations, we set up two alternative capture-recapture scenarios, one resembling two isolated national monitoring programs effort was recorded using a global positioning system (GPS) track-log. The total yearly effort was on average around 25 000 km per year, most of which was driven by wardens on snow scooters. No comparable structured record of sampling effort was available from the Swedish monitoring system.
After data collection, DNA material was extracted and amplified from all collected scats. Over the years, the DNA extraction and microsatellite genotyping protocols have been modified; from manual to automated DNA extraction and by replacing singleplex PCR amplification with multiplex PCR. Earlier protocols are described in Flagstad et al. (2004) and Brøseth et al. (2010). In the most updated protocol automated DNA extraction was used applying a Genemole DNA extraction robot, following the protocol for tissue samples provided by the manufacturer, Mole Genetics, Lysaker, Norway. Microsatellite genotyping to identify individual wolverines included eleven autosomal loci, distributed in two multiplex panels (Table 1). Assuming a panmictic population across the study area, the probability of identity (pID; Waits et al. 2001) was 2.9  10 27 for unrelated wolverines, and 9.2  10 24 for siblings.
PCR amplifications for autosomal microsatellite loci were performed in 10 ml reactions containing 3.0 mM MgCl 2 , 0.2 mM of each dNTP, 2.0-8.0 pmol of each primer, 0.5 mg of bovine serum albumine (BSA), 0.9 units of HotStar DNA polymerase (Qiagen) and 2 ml of undiluted DNA extract. A touchdown PCR program was used with an initial denaturation step of 95°C for 15 min. Six touchdown cycles with 94°C for 30 s, 58°C for 30 s decreasing 1°C each cycle and 72°C for 1 min was followed by 33 cycles of 94°C for 30 s, 52°C for 30 s and 72°C for 1 min, and a final extension at 72°C for 10 min. Genotyping errors caused by amplification of poor quality DNA from scat samples such as allelic dropout and false alleles can severely bias estimates of population parameters by creating 'false' individuals (Mills et al. 2000, Waits andLeberg 2000). Therefore, a number of control measures were performed, to ensure the quality of the genetic data. All scat samples were amplified at least three times for each microsatellite marker (the multitube approach; Taberlet et al. 1996). A single-locus genotype was not accepted before replicates resulted in at least three identical homozygote profiles or two identical heterozygote profiles. These criteria were based on a pilot study, where we compared genotypes obtained from scats versus blood or for a country effect. Detection probability was modeled as a function of both a common and separate time effect in the two countries. We also tested for a gender effect, and we checked if one or two classes of detectability were more supported by the data. Finally, and only for Norway, we estimated the yearly sampling effort in a circle of 8 km radius for females and 15 km for males, centered on the geometric mean of all sampling location of each individual, and used it to explain part of the temporal and individual variation in detection probability. Buffer values correspond to the average estimated home range size of wolverines of the two sexes in Scandinavia (Mattisson et al. 2011).

[SECTION] estimating population size accounting for violation of the closure assumption
One of the assumptions of the multi-state approach is that individuals cannot be in more than one state during the same session. This created a conflict with our sampling design, as a few of the wolverines living close to the national border were sometimes detected both in Norway and in Sweden during the same sampling session. This issue also constituted a violation of the assumption of geographic closure, a rather common problem in the estimation of population size (Kendall 1999). Several approaches have been developed to correct population size and density estimates when the study area is not geographically closed (Gardner et al. 2010, Bischof andSwenson 2012), most of them based on the idea of estimating the proportion of time each individual is expected to spend inside and outside the study area during the sampling period.
We used a similar approach for our case study. We compiled a dataset of about 12 000 locations from 26 wolverines, captured and fitted with GPS-collars in the regions of Finnmark, Troms and Trøndelag in central-northern Norway, between 2010 and 2013. We selected locations referring to the period February-May, and calculated the average GPS location for each individual. Then we calculated the distance between this center point and all the other locations, and produced a probability distribution, estimating the proportion of time each individual was expected to spend farther than a given distance from its home range center (Fig. 3a,c). As the probability distribution function was significantly different for males and females, we produced a different curve for the two sexes. This allowed us to estimate the proportion of time each individual wolverine sampled by DNA was expected to spend in Norway and Sweden, based on the distance between the geometric center of its DNA sampling locations and the national border (Fig. 3b,d).
Then, to comply with the requirements of the multi-state analytical design, we first assigned to Norway all the individuals detected on both sides of the national border, and produced a closure-corrected population size estimate for each of the two countries, using the following equation:
,
 , is population size for year t in state x, n t,x is the number of individuals sampled at time t in state x, P i t x  ( , , ) is the estimate of detection probability for the (hereafter called NOSHARE), the other corresponding to a shared trans-boundary effort (hereafter SHARE). In both cases, we needed to account for the possibility for each individual wolverine to move between two geographic states (Norway and Sweden), and three biological states (alive, dead by legal harvest, dead by other causes). Moreover, we needed to account for the potential presence of individual heterogeneity in detection probability, which can produce biased estimates of abundance when not properly accounted for (Hwang andHuggins 2005, Cubaynes et al. 2010). Therefore, we used the general framework of multi-event models (Pradel 2005) in program E-SURGE (Choquet et al. 2005) to integrate a two-site capture-recapture model with live detections and dead recovery (Burnham 1993), and a mixture model incorporating individual heterogeneity in detection probability (Pledger et al. 2003, Pradel 2009).
In the case of the SHARE design, all wolverines were potentially observable while alive, irrespective of their transition across the Norway-Sweden border, as a result of the data-sharing between the two monitoring programs. Therefore, the resulting model structure comprised seven possible states. Individuals alive in Norway could have either high or low detectability, and the same classification was used for wolverines in Sweden. Additionally, we included a specific state for wolverines legally harvested in Norway, one for the individuals dying from other causes, and one absorbing state containing all individuals dead in previous years. We did not include in the model the probability of emigration outside the study area across the E14 highway, as our data showed that such probability could be reasonably disregarded. Out of the 683 wolverines detected within 200 km north and south from the E14, only about 1% was detected on both sides of the highway during the whole 12-year monitoring period. Detection probability for legally shot wolverines was set to one, as all of them were reported to the authorities. We performed a goodness of fit test in program U-CARE (Choquet et al. 2009), which revealed no excess of transients and no trap-dependence.
For the NOSHARE design, the detection matrix was modified to take into account that Norwegian wolverines moving to Sweden became unobservable and vice versa. This corresponded to the temporary-emigration model of Kendall and Nichols (2002), which allows the production of unbiased estimates of survival and transition probabilities, under Markovian (i.e. non-random) temporary emigration (Schaub et al. 2004). We used the test 2C.t in program U-CARE (Choquet et al. 2009) to reveal such a possible non-random temporary emigration (Schaub et al. 2004), which was indeed confirmed (z  -2.343, p  0.019). This indicated that estimating population size, survival, and transition probabilities from a design with no trans-boundary data sharing required the addition of an unobservable state, as biased parameter estimates would have been likely otherwise (Schaub et al. 2004). A detailed description of the multi-event parameterization is provided in the Supplementary material Appendix 1.
For both designs, we modeled transition probability as a function of gender, and of the distance between the geometric center of all individual sampling locations and the national Norway-Sweden border. For survival, we considered models with time and gender effects, and we tested with peaks of 50% increase in population size in a single year, and an overall 417% population growth over the 10 years of monitoring (Fig. 1c).

[SECTION] dna-based estimates of population size
For the NOSHARE design, model selection procedures revealed that in both countries a model with a single class of detectability was better supported than a two-mixture model. Also, detection probability was higher for males than for females in both countries, but both sexes exhibited a relatively high detection over the whole sampling period. Average detection probability for females was 0.48 in Norway (95% CIs  0.44-0.53) and 0.49 in Sweden (95% CIs  0.41-0.57), whereas males exhibited a 0.72 detection in Norway (95% CIs  0.66-0.77) and 0.67 in Sweden (95% CIs  0.58-0.75). In both countries, detection also showed a significant temporal variation. Model ranking for both countries and time-dependent detection probability estimates are shown in the Supplementary material Appendix 1 Table A1-A2 and Fig. A1. When analyzing the SHARE design, model selection supported the same main effects on detection probability, but revealed that a common time effect for the two countries was more supported than two independent temporal variations in detection (see model 1 and 3 in Table 2).
Resulting from the models with the highest rank (models 1 in Table 1, Supplementary material Appendix 1 Table A1-A2), point estimates of population size from the two individual i at time t in state x, and F i x  , is the estimated proportion of time the individual i is expected to spend in state x. We performed all the analyses using also Sweden as a country of first assignment for bordering wolverines, and found that this subjective choice had no influence on the results.

[SECTION] population size and growth rate estimates based on den counts
Based on extrapolation from the annual counts of reproductive units, the wolverine population of southern Scandinavia was estimated to have grown from 104 to 248 individuals in 10 years, corresponding to an overall 138% increase between 2002 and 2013 (Fig. 1a). The annual growth rate was particularly high during the first years of the study, when estimates of up to a 40% increase in population size in a single year were produced by the monitoring system (Fig. 1a). When examining the Swedish and Norwegian portions of the population separately, two different patterns emerged. On the Norwegian side, the population was estimated to grow rapidly between 2003 and 2006, with an 80% increase in population size in three years, and to remain more or less stable around 120 individuals afterwards (Fig. 1b). On the Swedish side the den monitoring estimates showed a strong increase in abundance over the whole monitoring period, emerged in the first years, which disappeared in the subsequent years of monitoring (Fig. 5a). A similar pattern was revealed when comparing the estimates for the Norwegian portion of the population alone: the den-count based estimates of population size got closer to the DNA-based ones with time, stabilizing on an asymptotic 10% negative bias (Fig. 5b). A different pattern emerged for Sweden with population size estimates derived from den-counts consistently 15-20% higher than the estimates resulting from the DNA monitoring (Fig. 5c).
When comparing the estimates of population growth rate, the two methods produced different estimates for the whole population and for its national portions. While the den-count monitoring provided an estimated population growth of 138% over the 12-year period, the DNA-based monitoring estimated such growth to be only 72% during the same period. Also, as shown in Fig. 6, the den-count monitoring produced the image of a population growing at a monitoring scenarios were rather similar, but the ones based on trans-boundary data sharing were more precise (Fig. 4). The average coefficients of variation (CV) of population size estimates were 0.24 and 0.17 for the NOSHARE and SHARE design, respectively, indicating a 30% increase in precision. Also for the two national estimates, the SHARE design provided more precise estimates. Such reduction of uncertainty was about 16% in Norway (from 0.21 to 0.18 CV) and about 48% in Sweden (from 0.31 to 0.16), showing that Sweden benefitted the most from the sharing of wolverine DNA data.

[SECTION] comparison of estimates from the two methods
When evaluated at the scale of the whole of the southern Scandinavian wolverine population, abundance estimates derived from the two monitoring methods exhibited a good consistency. A 20% negative bias in the den-count estimates Table 2. Model selection for the analysis of wolverine population size in southern Scandinavia 2002-2013. The analysis is based on the SHARE design: p1 and p2 are models with one or two classes of heterogeneity, respectively; t is a country-specific time effect; t * is a common time effect in the two countries; effort is the total number of km driven inside each individual's home range; border dist. is the distance between each individual's sampling center and the national border.

[SECTION] estimates of population vital rates
The plot in Fig. 7 shows that sharing data across the national border between Norway and Sweden allowed a strong increase in the precision of vital rates estimates.
While the point estimates of sex-specific survival probabilities were similar between the two analytical scenarios, precision was three times higher for the SHARE design. This permitted the documentation of male wolverines having a significantly lower survival rate than females in Norway, which would not have been detectable without the increased precision resulting from data-sharing (Fig. 7a).
Similarly, the estimates of the transition probabilities in the two directions across the national border have large and overlapping confidence intervals, when obtained from the NO SHARE design, but they exhibit a five times higher precision and non-overlapping confidence intervals in the SHARE scenario (Fig. 7b). This was due to the lower ability of the model to distinguish between survival and temporary fast rate (about 27% per year) during the first years of monitoring, but significantly slowing down its rate of increase during subsequent year (b  -3.186, p  0.01; Fig. 6a). DNA monitoring and capture-recapture modeling showed that population growth rate was instead rather constant throughout the study period (b  0.9645, p  0.51), and on average about 5% per year (Fig. 6b). Therefore, taking the DNA-based estimates as a reference, the monitoring system based on den counts seems to have overestimated population growth rate at least until the years 2007-2008.
The same pattern emerged when considering population growth rate estimates for Norway and Sweden separately. Population growth based on DNA sampling and capturerecapture modeling was 25% in Norway and 230% in Sweden, respectively, over the 12-year period, much lower than the 69% and 317% resulting from den-counts. The overestimation of population growth rate was concentrated during the first 5-6 years of monitoring (Supplementary material Appendix 1 Fig. A2-A3).  it is based on fewer assumptions and on a formal statistical treatment of the underlying detection process. It is therefore suitable to be used as a reference for the evaluation of the less robust methodology.
All count-based monitoring systems are highly sensitive to temporal variation in detection probability (Yoccoz et al. 2001), and those that learn from the accumulation of previous knowledge are especially likely to overestimate population trend during the first years of monitoring (Gervasi et al. 2014). In our specific case, the patterns observed were consistent with the hypothesis that a positive trend occurred in the detectability of wolverine dens during the first years of the study. As the count-based index of population trend was not able to separate the actual demographic trend of the wolverine population from the trend in the system's ability to detect reproductions, it provided the management system with positively biased estimates of population growth rate during the initial phase of the study. The social and economic costs of this bias are not easy to quantify, but they may have been high. Overestimating population growth rate may have contributed to overemphasize the perception of the conflict resulting from wolverine presence in Scandinavia, where carnivore acceptance is generally low, and where the level of perceived conflict between human interests and carnivore presence is high (Røskaft et al. 2007).
Although the overestimation of population growth rate was highly influenced by the first 2-3 years of monitoring (Fig. 6), it should be noted that the time series between 2002-2013 probably only captures the tail of the learning emigration, when one of the states was associated with zero detection probability. Consequently, the SHARE monitoring system was able to reveal that the probability to perform a transition from Sweden to Norway (y SN  0.07, SE  0.013, 95% CIs  0.04-0.09) was significantly higher than in the opposite direction (y NS  0.017, SE  0.005, 95% CIs  0.01-0.03). Finally, the harvest rate estimates in Norway also exhibited higher precision when data was shared, with CV being 50% smaller than in the case of two isolated monitoring systems (Fig. 7c).

[SECTION] discussion
The results of this study contain two main messages for the demographic monitoring of wide ranging, elusive species. Firstly, the blind use of simple count-based indices, when they fail to account for temporal variation in detectability, can cause serious bias in the estimation of population trend. Secondly, data sharing is a crucial need for the study of the ecological processes occurring in trans-boundary populations.
Regarding the first outcome of our study, the use of noninvasive genetic sampling and capture-recapture modeling drew a more nuanced picture of the demographic changes occurring in the Scandinavian wolverine population, than the one depicted by the count-based monitoring. While the DNA based picture should not be regarded as the truth, as it was derived from just another type of estimation process,  Regarding the second objective of our study, the performance of the SHARE design clearly showed the benefits of matching the scale of monitoring to the scale of the population processes. By reducing the uncertainty around the estimates of transition probabilities, the SHARE design showed that the flow of individuals from one country to the other is not balanced overall. More individuals enter Norway from Sweden than the opposite, thus creating the potential for source-sink dynamics across the national border. The possibility of a source-sink system is especially likely, given that the high hunting pressure in Norway contrasts with the protectionist policy on the other side of the border. Based on our model results, the net flow of individuals from southern Sweden to southern Norway should be about 7-9 individuals per year, whereas the annual number of adult wolverines shot in southern Norway in the last five years is 23.2. This means that about one third of the wolverines removed in Norway each year might be immediately replaced by immigrant wolverines from Sweden, with clear potential consequences on the efficacy and efficiency of the current management system. It will be crucial to evaluate if such unbalanced transition probabilities are indeed caused by the different management policies implemented in the two countries, and especially if there is a positive feedback between the extent of hunting pressure in Norway and the patterns of wolverine movements across the national border (Gervasi et al. 2015). Other cases, such as the culling of cougars in the USA (Robinson et al. 2008), have shown that culling of territorial species can disrupt the stability of the territory arrangement and increase immigration, in a way that undermines the initial management objectives of the removal.
From a strictly modeling point of view, it is not surprising that the inclusion of an unobservable state in a multi-state capture-recapture design was associated with a reduction of precision in the estimates. It was less obvious that the effort by different national monitoring institutions to set up and maintain a common monitoring program on a transboundary population, with shared protocols and database, could produce large benefits on the amount and quality of the monitoring output. While 88% of European large carnivore populations are trans-boundary in nature (Linnell et al. 2007b), most of them are still monitored and managed at a strictly national scale, with poor communication between the bordering monitoring institutions (Linnell et al. 2007b). The results of our study indicate the potential benefits deriving from a trans-boundary integration of large carnivore monitoring systems and the risks of failing to do so. phase in the monitoring process. A structured count of wolverine reproductive units started in Scandinavia in 1996, so that 25% of known denning sites had already been discovered before the beginning of the DNA sampling in 2002, while an additional 40% were first found and included in the national databases during the first three years after 2002. Accordingly, it is likely that most of the positive trend in the detection probability of wolverine denning sites also occurred during that initial period. On the other hand, results show that the performance of the count-based monitoring system improved after this initial phase, exhibiting a substantial consistency with population size and trend estimates provided by the DNA-based capture-recapture approach.
Counts of natal dens, nests, and more generally of fixed structures that persist in time, is a standard tool to monitor abundance and trend of elusive species. Mammals such as badgers Meles meles (Wilson et al. 2003), Eurasian lynx Lynx lynx (Linnell et al. 2007a), Eurasian otters Lutra lutra (Hájková et al. 2008), and brown bears Ursus arctos (Bischof et al. 2016) are still mainly monitored through naïve countbased indices in most of their distribution range. Birds like spotted owls Strix occidentalis (Seamans et al. 2001), bald eagles HaIiaeetus leucocephalus (Hatfield et al. 1996) and several other species of raptors share the same sampling limitations. Even though the use of systematic sampling and of an explicit inclusion of detection probability in the estimation process have long been recognized as a requirement for any monitoring effort (Yoccoz et al. 2001), it is still likely that indices of population trend will be heavily used in the future, especially when more structured and robust forms of sampling are associated with prohibitive costs. A typical case of the current trends in the large-scale monitoring of elusive species is provided by the increasing involvement of lay people in the opportunistic collection and reporting of demographic monitoring data (i.e. citizen science; Dickinson et al. 2010), which has led to an increase in the quantity of information available, and to a potential decrease in its quality. Based on the evidence provided by the wolverine case, we recommend that caution should be used whenever using naïve indices to monitor population trend. In particular, alternative sampling methods should also be employed whenever feasible, to serve as a tool for the evaluation of the performance of the monitoring system. Managers should also be aware that count-based monitoring has a risk of overestimating population growth during the first years after its implementation. Conservation and management decisions should be made and evaluated on long time series, as short monitoring programs are more likely to produce flawed information. This being said, monitoring programs have multiple goals and need to consider multiple issues, including social acceptance. The den based monitoring provides a metric that the public can easily relate to, at least in part because it has been in use for almost 20 years. It also provides spatially explicit data on reproduction and reproductive sites, which can be important when considering land use planning and conflict mitigation. Finally, the data collection protocols for the two methods are linked, such that the fieldwork associated with den monitoring is also used to find tracks and search for the scats that are the foundation of the DNA based estimate.

