[SECTION] title
Evaluating the interaction of faecal pellet deposition rates and DNA degradation rates to optimize sampling design for DNA-based mark-recapture analysis of Sonoran pronghorn

[SECTION] abstract
Knowledge of population demographics is important for species management but can be challenging in low-density, wide-ranging species. Population monitoring of the endangered Sonoran pronghorn (Antilocapra americana sonoriensis) is critical for assessing the success of recovery efforts, and noninvasive DNA sampling (NDS) could be more cost-effective and less intrusive than traditional methods. We evaluated faecal pellet deposition rates and faecal DNA degradation rates to maximize sampling efficiency for DNA-based mark-recapture analyses. Deposition data were collected at five watering holes using sampling intervals of 1-7 days and averaged one pellet pile per pronghorn per day. To evaluate nuclear DNA (nDNA) degradation, 20 faecal samples were exposed to local environmental conditions and sampled at eight time points from one to 124 days. Average amplification success rates for six nDNA microsatellite loci were 81% for samples on day one, 63% by day seven, 2% by day 14 and 0% by day 60. We evaluated the efficiency of different sampling intervals (1-10 days) by estimating the number of successful samples, success rate of individual identification and laboratory costs per successful sample. Cost per successful sample increased and success and efficiency declined as the sampling interval increased. Results indicate NDS of faecal pellets is a feasible method for individual identification, population estimation and demographic monitoring of Sonoran pronghorn. We recommend collecting samples >7 days old and estimate that a sampling interval of 4-7 days in summer conditions (i.e. extreme heat and exposure to UV light) will achieve desired sample sizes for mark-recapture analysis while also maximizing efficiency.

[SECTION] introduction
Population estimation is important for management, especially with endangered species, but can be challenging in low-density, wide-ranging species. Accurate estimates of population abundance rely on maximizing detectability and minimizing individual heterogeneity in detection probability, especially when employing noninvasive genetic sampling (NDS) methods (Borchers et al. 2002;Lukacs & Burnham 2005). To be successful, sampling must be conducted at a time and location that maximizes the probability of detection. NDS approaches can provide accurate population estimates, eliminate capture and postcapture related stress on animals and improve cost efficiency over traditional methods (e.g. Marucco et al. 2009;Brøseth et al. 2010;DeBarba et al. 2010;Stenglein et al. 2010;Stansbury et al. 2014). Faecal DNA approaches are well developed in monitoring carnivores (Prugh et al. 2005;Meijer et al. 2008;Marucco et al. 2009;Stenglein et al. 2010); however, these methods are less common in population estimation of ungulates (Harris et al. 2010;Brinkman et al. 2011;Poole et al. 2011;Ebert et al. 2012a,b).
Faecal DNA analysis has become a viable method for estimating population size, sex ratio, parentage, relatedness and genetic structure through individual identification of species that are rare and/or difficult to capture (Mills et al. 2000;Creel et al. 2003;Waits & Paetkau 2005;Schwartz et al. 2007;DeBarba et al. 2010). Many studies have been successful in conducting individual identification of wildlife by amplifying nuclear DNA (nDNA) obtained from epithelial cells shed in faeces (e.g. Marucco et al. 2009;DeBarba et al. 2010;Stansbury et al. 2014;Wultsch et al. 2014). Environmental conditions (Lucchini et al. 2002;Piggott 2004;Murphy et al. 2007;Santini et al. 2007), age of the sample (Piggott 2004;Murphy et al. 2007;Santini et al. 2007;Beja-Pereira et al. 2009), diet (Murphy et al. 2003;Panasci et al. 2011) and storage and preservation method (Piggott & Taylor 2003;Panasci et al. 2011) can all contribute to the rate of DNA degradation. DNA degradation rates influence faecal DNA amplification success rates and microsatellite genotyping error rates (Broquet & Petit 2004;Pompanon et al. 2005), which together impact the success rates for individual identification. Genotyping errors can lead to inflated population estimates (Waits & Leberg 2000;Creel et al. 2003;Lukacs et al. 2009), and biased population estimates can have major effects on the management of rare or endangered species (Taberlet et al. 1999).
An important factor in faecal DNA sampling design is deposition rate, which can be affected by moisture content in forage, season, diet, sex and age of target species (Smith 1964;Neff 1968;Irby 1981;Rogers 1987;Sawyer et al. 1990). Research on multiple species of wild ungulates indicates average daily deposition rates range from eight to 52 pellet piles per individual per day (Neff 1968;Rogers 1987;Sawyer et al. 1990;Miller & Drake 2004). Scat persistence, or removal rate, also affects the number of samples available. Removal rates are higher in wet than dry conditions due to increased microbial activity (Kie et al. 2003;McConkey 2005;Van Vliet et al. 2008;Norris & Michalski 2010), and rain events that wash away samples (Harestad & Bunnell 1987) or increase degradation rates (Brinkman et al. 2010(Brinkman et al. , 2011)). Additionally, the number and density of individuals can influence removal rates with samples often being trampled or rendered unusable in areas of high animal activity or density, for example artificial feeders or drinkers (Harestad & Bunnell 1987).
DNA degradation rates determine how long after deposition an individual can be detected from a faecal sample with molecular methods (i.e. successful genotyping). Research indicates that cold, dry conditions (Farrell et al. 2000;Lucchini et al. 2002;Adams et al. 2011) and collection of the most recently deposited samples (Farrell et al. 2000;Piggott 2004) maintain the highest DNA quality and quantity. As success rates differ between species, study area and season, it is essential to implement pilot studies to determine DNA degradation rates, genotyping errors and number of replicates needed for reliable genotypes prior to conducting research (Taberlet et al. 1999;Piggott 2004). Additionally, collecting fresh samples can be difficult in rare or wide-ranging species, and thus knowledge of the time postdeposition that DNA remains detectable is critical for appropriate study design.
We use the Sonoran pronghorn (Antilocapra americana sonoriensis) as a model system for optimizing sampling design for NDS-CR mark-recapture methods for population monitoring by assessing deposition and DNA degradation rates for faecal pellets. The Sonoran pronghorn is found exclusively in the Sonoran Desert of Arizona and Mexico and was listed under the US Endangered Species Act of 1973 (USFWS 1998). In the mid 1800s, the U.S. population is believed to have been in the thousands (O 'Gara & Yoakum 2004), but by 1991, Arizona's population was estimated at 250 animals. However, after several years of below-average rainfall, changing climatic conditions, and a severe drought, the 2003 U.S. population estimate was just 21 individuals (Bright & Hervert 2003). A captive breeding pen for Sonoran pronghorn was initiated on the Cabeza Prieta National Wildlife Refuge (CPNWR) to facilitate recovery efforts (Otte 2006). By 2012, the U.S. population had recovered to an estimated 159 individuals (95% CI: 112-432). The current range of Sonoran pronghorn in the U.S.A covers approximately 11 000 km 2 (USFWS 2010), and most of the U.S. population resides in southwest Arizona.
While there are no federal delisting criteria for Sonoran pronghorn, criteria for downlisting to threatened requires either (i) a stable population of approximately 300 adult Sonoran pronghorn in one U.S. population and a second separate U.S. population or (ii) population numbers that are determined to be adequate to maintain a long-term, viable population (USFWS 1998). Current surveys and monitoring of wild pronghorn consist of locating radio-collared individuals opportunistically from the ground, bimonthly monitoring flights, and a biennial aerial population count (Hervert et al. 1997;US-FWS 2010). While this provides population estimates, it is costly and does not provide information on survival, reproduction or genetic diversity, which are attained with NDS methods.
Often the primary motive behind sampling design in wildlife management is minimizing cost, which does not necessarily correlate with ideal sampling for optimal NDS-CR design. Our methods aim to optimize both cost and recovery of target DNA from faecal samples. Our goal was to determine the optimal sampling design for monitoring Sonoran pronghorn using faecal DNA and mark-recapture techniques by estimating faecal pellet deposition rates and DNA degradation rates. During the hot, dry months (April-June), Sonoran pronghorn congregate at artificial drinkers (Hervert et al. 1997;USFWS 2010), presenting the opportunity for targeted sampling, which should reduce sampling effort and increase the number of samples collected. We anticipated collection of multiple pellet piles per individual per day at drinkers due to the length of time spent at the feed stations, and we expected rapid DNA degradation due to exposure to intense ultraviolet light and high temperatures. Therefore, we predicted a 1-3 week interval would be the optimal gap between sampling sessions to obtain adequate samples sizes for mark-recapture analysis and maximize efficiency for both field and laboratory (Brinkman et al. 2010;DeMay et al. 2013).

[SECTION] study area
The study area includes the captive Sonoran pronghorn pen and two drinkers on the CPNWR, and three drinkers on the Barry M. Goldwater Range (BMGR). State and federal personnel provide supplemental feed for pronghorn at these sites weekly during the dry months (Fig. 1). Feeding and watering begins in April or May and ends in October or November depending on the amount of rainfall (J. Atkinson, personal communication).
The study area has average high temperatures of over 38°C in summer and is one of the hottest and driest regions of North America (Integrated Natural Resources Management Plan (INRMP) 2003). From June to October, temperatures on CPNWR can exceed 32°C for more than 100 consecutive days (USFWS 2002). The dry season extends from April to June as most precipitation falls in winter and late summer. Average annual precipitation on the CPNWR ranges from 20 cm in the east to 7.5 cm in the west (USFWS 2002).

[SECTION] estimating deposition rates
In July 2012, we collected deposition data for pronghorn at two drinkers on CPNWR and three drinkers on BMGR. First, we cleared all faecal pellets at a radius of 25-40 m around drinkers and feeding areas. Circle diameters varied between sites as the layout of feed and water sites differed. Faecal pellet piles were counted at an interval of 1-7 days. Three sites were sampled once on day 1 (n = 1) and day 7 (n = 2), while two sites were sampled multiple times on day 1, 2 and 6, and day 3 and 7, respectively (Table 1). Sampling location and interval were limited by requirements to minimize pronghorn disturbance and travel to drinkers with agency personnel. We counted all discrete pellet piles in the cleared circle. To minimize the potential for wasted effort in the laboratory, we excluded piles that appeared to be from >1 individual based on pellet shape and size, as these were likely mixed samples.
To estimate the expected number of pellet piles available for sampling each day, we averaged number of pellet piles per pronghorn per day across sites (Table 1). The number of pronghorn using each drinker is estimated by agency personnel from remote camera data and is based on the maximum number seen on camera at one time.

[SECTION] dna degradation
To ensure collection of samples <24 h old, the area around feed stations in the captive pen on CPNWR was cleared of pellets on 3 July 2012. On 4 July 2012, we returned and collected 20 pellet piles from ten presumed adult (five males, five females) and 10 presumed fawn (five males, four females, one unknown sex). Fawn and adult samples were classified based on visual inspection of size and morphology (thus, 'presumed'). While there are currently no published studies documenting size differences in faecal pellets of fawn and adult pronghorn, differences have been documented for other ungulates (Ezcurra & Gallina 1981;Bubenik 1982;MacCracken & Van Ballenberge 1987;Sanchez-Rojas et al. 2004). Pellet piles were exposed to local environmental conditions near the captive pen for 124 days from 4 July 2012 through 5 November 2012. Three pellets were collected from each sample at days 1, 3, 5, 7, 14, 21, 60 and 124, placed in paper coin envelopes, and stored at room temperature in a plastic Ziploc bag with one cup of silica desiccant (Fisher catalogue no. S161-212) to reduce DNA degradation prior to analysis. We tracked rainfall and temperature during the sampling period using local weather stations (http://www.earthonly.com/ajo/ weather/) (Table S1, Supporting Information). Average high temperatures were approximately 39 °C from day 1 to 60 and 33 °C from days 60 to 124, and total rainfall from day 1 to 124 was 16.4 cm (Table S1, Supporting Information).

[SECTION] dna extraction and pcr amplification
DNA was extracted using three pellets from each sample, and samples were extracted in a random order across time points to minimize bias introduced during sample processing. Preserved samples were extracted seven to 25 days postcollection to minimize DNA degradation during storage. Previous studies of DNA preservation on silica for ungulate faecal samples showed higher nDNA concentration, fewer genotyping errors and greater success achieving a consensus genotype compared to other storage methods (Soto-Calderon et al. 2009), and no consistent support for an effect of storage time on DNA amplification success on faecal pellets (Soto-Calderon et al. 2009;DeMay et al. 2013). All extractions were performed using a Qiagen QIAamp DNA stool mini kit (Qiagen Inc., Valencia, CA, USA) in a laboratory dedicated to processing low quantity DNA samples. Extraction protocols followed those described in Adams et al. (2011) with the modification of adding a larger volume (3200 lL) of ASL buffer in step one to ensure pellets were completely immersed in buffer. Each set of extractions contained a negative control to monitor for contamination.
Six nDNA microsatellite loci previously used for pronghorn ranging in size from 113 to 270 base pairs (bp) were amplified in a single multiplex PCR (Table S2, Supporting Information). Sex identification was determined by a separate PCR using KY1/KY2 primers (Brinkman & Hundertmark 2009) as described in Woodruff et al. (2014). A negative and positive control were included in each PCR. PCR products were analysed using an ABI 3130xl capillary machine (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) and visualized in Genemapper 3.7 (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). All samples that failed to amplify in the first PCR were reamplified (Murphy et al. 2007). We performed a minimum of two replicates per sample from each time point, and consensus genotypes were determined using replicates from multiple time points. A PCR replicate for a locus was deemed successful if DNA amplified in the expected size range with an intensity of ≥100 fluorescent units, even if it did not match the consensus genotype. PCR success rates were estimated as number of successful PCRs across all loci per time point divided by total number of PCRs conducted across all loci. In an earlier study, we assessed mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) amplification success rates for the same samples by amplifying a 129 bp mtDNA locus Woodruff et al. 2014).

[SECTION] genotyping error rates
Two replicates were performed per time point; however, three to eight repetitions were performed per sample to obtain a consensus genotype for each of the six microsatellite loci using replicates from multiple time points. Genotyping errors were calculated following Broquet & Petit (2004). We classified errors as false alleles (FA) when alleles not found in the consensus genotype were present (Taberlet et al. 1999;Broquet et al. 2007) and as allelic dropout (ADO) if, in a heterozygous individual, there was failure to amplify one of two alleles (Taberlet et al. 1996).

[SECTION] statistical analysis
PCR success was modelled using a mixed-effects binary logistic regression model. Evaluating sampling interval efficiency for mark-recapture analyses. A successful sample (successful individual ID genotyping) was defined as a sample that amplified at a minimum of four loci. Probability of identity siblings (P ID sibs) (Waits et al. 2001) was conducted using GENALEX 6.5 software (Peakall & Smouse 2012) and was 0.023 for these six loci. We acknowledge that 4-6 loci will not be sufficient for distinguishing some first-degree relatives; however, when applying this method in the field, we require consensus genotypes at seven of 10 loci (70%) for individual ID. Here, we use the four of six threshold to indicate the proportion of loci that need to amplify to obtain an individual ID.
To evaluate optimal sampling intervals for markrecapture analysis, we assumed 15 pronghorn per site (range: 6-25 per site), an estimated deposition rate of one pellet pile per pronghorn per day, and an average sample removal rate of 10% per day. We acknowledge that removal rates vary by drinker; however, we used this average value of removal rates at East Release (Table 1) for modelling purposes. Thus, the number of samples available for collection is a product of the number of pronghorn using the site and the number of days in the interval, minus 10% per day. For example, with 15 pronghorn and a sampling interval of 4 days, 15 samples are 1 day old, 14 are 2 days old, 13 are 3 days old, 12 are 4 days old and so on. We then used our model-based predicted PCR success rates to estimate the number and per cent of samples that could be successfully genotyped at each sampling interval from 1 to 10 days. At every sampling interval, each sample was assigned a specific predicted PCR success dependent on sample age. For simplicity, and because there were negligible differences between different sex and age classes, only adult female PCR success rates are shown in the figure .
Additionally, we measured efficiency in terms of cost per successful sample, assuming a cost of $60 per collected sample to cover laboratory supplies and labour. Cost per successful sample was calculated as total cost of analysing all collected samples divided by number of predicted successful samples. We did not estimate field costs because future sampling will be conducted as part of the regular duties of field personnel when they visit drinkers to provide feed. To estimate an optimal sampling interval for our study system, we set the following criteria: (i) total number of collected samples for each sampling event should be three times the number of pronghorn estimated to use the site (i.e. ≥45 samples if there are 15 pronghorn present), and (ii) individual ID success rates (successful genotyping) should be >80%. The target number of samples was chosen to ensure sufficient recaptures and maximize performance of markrecapture estimators (Solberg et al. 2006); individual ID success rate of 80% was chosen to maximize efficiency and minimize cost per sample.

[SECTION] deposition
The average number of faecal pellet piles deposited per day ranged from four to 43, and deposition rates varied depending on temperature and rainfall, number of days between observations and number of pronghorn estimated to use the site (Table 1). The average number of pellet piles per pronghorn per day decreased as number of days between observations increased, and the number of pellet piles counted at drinkers decreased after major rain events (Table 1). The average number of pellet piles per pronghorn per day was 1.11 (range: 0.77-1.72), excluding sites with major rain events (Table 1).

[SECTION] degradation and pcr success
PCR success rates for nDNA microsatellites were 81% and 80% at days 1 and 3, respectively, and dropped to 69%, 63%, 2% and 0.01%, at days 5, 7, 14 and 21, respectively (Table 2). None of the microsatellite loci amplified at the 60 or 124 day time points (Table S3, Supporting Information). Based on the mixed-effects logistic regression model for PCR success, we found a significant effect for age of sample (Z = À13.35, P < 0.0001), with the odds (odds = probability/1-probability) of PCR success decreasing by approximately 88% every time sample age is doubled. Longer loci had significantly lower PCR success probabilities (Z = À2.34, P = 0.0193), with the odds of success decreasing by a factor of approximately 0.5% per unit (base pair) increase in length. No statistically significant differences were detected in PCR success probabilities between samples from animals of different sex or age; however, the trend in estimates suggests a higher success rate for samples from fawns and females (Table 2 and Fig. 2). DNA contamination was not detected in any negative controls.
Genotyping error rates. Average ADO rates were high (21%) at day 1, and per locus ADO rates ranged from 4% to 33%. Average rate of ADO increased to 23% at day 3, 53% by day 7, 88% by day 14 and 100% by day 21. Average FA rates were lower at 1% (locus range: 0-5%) in samples <1 day old, 4% (locus range: 0-9%) for day 7 and 100% by day 14 (Table 3 andTable S4, Supporting Information). We did not detect a significant impact of locus length on genotyping error rates.
Sampling interval efficiency for mark-recapture. For a simulated population of 15 pronghorn, the estimated number of successful samples was 15 on day 1 increasing to 62 successful samples by day 10 (Fig. 3). Predicted individual ID success was 100% through day 3, dropping to 94% by day 5 and 75% by day 10 (Fig. 3). Target sample size (>39 number of individuals using the drinker) was reached on day 4, and a sampling interval of ≤7 days assured the proportion of successfully genotyped samples was >80%. Cost per successful sample increased from $60 per successful sample on day 1 (100% efficiency) to $61 per sample by day 4 (98% efficiency) to >$71/sample by day 7 (84% efficiency) (Table 4).

[SECTION] discussion
Appropriate sampling methods are of primary importance, and knowledge of the species' biology and behaviour helps dictate sampling design (Lukacs & Burnham 2005;Puechmaille & Petit 2007). NDS approaches typically use standardized transect sampling (Kohn et al. 1999;Prugh et al. 2005;Kendall et al. 2009;DeBarba et al. 2010) or targeted sampling methods (Prigioni et al. 2006;Puechmaille & Petit 2007;Rudnick et al. 2008;Robinson et al. 2009;Stenglein et al. 2010). Abundance estimates using standardized transect sampling methods are the most commonly used approach and perform well in randomly distributed populations (Buckland et al. 2001;Williams et al. 2002); however, less focus has been placed on targeted sampling designs. Sonoran pronghorn provide a good model system for evaluating a targeted sampling design because they congregate at drinkers during drought periods. In this study, our goal was to develop an efficient temporal sampling design for mark-recapture that accounted for sample deposition rates and DNA degradation rates while also minimizing disturbance to pronghorn. Much research has been carried out on faecal DNA degradation rates; however, this is one of the first studies (see Lonsinger et al. 2014) to consider the combination of faecal deposition, DNA degradation rates and cost in mark-recapture sampling design, and we expect this approach to be valuable for optimizing markrecapture sampling design in other systems.

[SECTION] factors influencing deposition at drinkers
Estimates of faecal deposition rates are a function of the number of deposition events that occur in the focal area and the sample removal rate. Our study evaluated deposition at drinkers and feeding sites, which are likely to have high and concentrated levels of deposition  (Irby 1981). Factors that likely influenced removal in our study system were insect activity, rain, mixing of pellet piles and stomping of pellet piles by pronghorn or humans. Estimates of deposition rates varied depending on the number of days between observations, maximum number of animals observed on camera at each site, removal rate and local weather conditions. Our data indicated an average deposition rate of one pellet pile per pronghorn per day and a removal rate of approximately 10% per day. Average number of pellet piles per pronghorn per day decreased as number of days between observations increased, presumably due to increased removal rates. Deposition data from two sites (Point of Pintas and Devil Hills) showed considerably fewer pellet piles than expected (Table 1), during a time when significant rain (29.46 mm) fell at these sites. At Point of Pintas, with an interval of 7 days and seven pronghorn present, we expected 44 pellet piles and counted 31, and at Devil Hills, with an interval of 7 days and 11 pronghorn using the site, we expected 69 pellet piles and counted only 30. We postulate this decrease in pellet piles could be attributed to removal by rain (wash-ing the pellets away) and less time spent at the drinkers as a result of increased availability of native forage and water due to rain. Additionally, deposition rates at Charlie Bell were lower than expected. Remote camera data indicate high levels of human activity at drinkers decreases pronghorn activity in the area (USFWS 2010) and could result in lower deposition at the drinker, Charlie Bell, which experiences high levels of human activity compared to other drinkers.
Factors influencing DNA degradation. Similar to other studies, we found the age of pellets dramatically affected PCR success rates (Piggott 2004;Murphy et al. 2007;Brinkman et al. 2010;DeMay et al. 2013) likely due to rapid DNA degradation caused by exposure to intense ultraviolet light and high temperatures. As expected, nDNA success rates were lower than mtDNA success rates reported previously for the same samples which were 100% up to day 14, dropping to 95% by day 21, 45% on day 60 and 10% by day 124 (Woodruff et al. (2014)). There are few studies of nDNA degradation rates for pellet-type faecal samples with comparable environmental conditions; however, our success rates were slightly lower at day 1 than other pellet studies with similar amplicon sizes (Maudet et al. 2004;DeMay et al. 2013) and lower than one pellet study with longer amplicon lengths (Brinkman et al. 2010). From day 5 to 7, our success rates were higher (64% vs. 43%) than those of pygmy rabbit (Brachylagus idahoensis) pellets under similar dry, hot conditions, yet our 21 day old samples failed nearly completely, while pygmy rabbit samples maintained 29% success (DeMay et al. 2013). Studies in southeast Alaska of Sitka black-tailed deer (Odocoileus hemionus sitkensis) pellets protected from rainfall had >90% PCR success rates for 1-28 days, while those  exposed to rain showed a significant decrease over time to approximately 70% by day 28 (Brinkman et al. 2010). The higher PCR success rate for the deer suggests that other factors, such as diet, environment and/or laboratory protocols, have greater influence on amplification success than locus length.
Our samples showed the greatest decline from day 7 to 14 with PCR success falling to 2% by day 14 and indicating analyses using nDNA, such as individual identification and parentage, should be conducted only on samples ≤7 days old. The first rain of the sampling period fell during the 7-14 day interval (total 1.5 cm) potentially indicating an effect of precipitation on degradation rates. However, in this study, the effect of age represents a combination of sample age, as well as the collective effects of rainfall, temperature and other environmental effects that were common to all samples. We acknowl-edge this was a limitation of our study and additional research using a design that evaluates samples exposed to varying environmental conditions over time would avoid confounding age with environmental factors. While our results were inconclusive as to whether rainfall impacted success rates, impacts of wet conditions on PCR success rates shown in other studies (Farrell et al. 2000;Piggott 2004;Murphy et al. 2007;Brinkman et al. 2010Brinkman et al. , 2011) ) highlights the importance of sampling during the dry season. Similar to other studies (Broquet et al. 2007;DeMay et al. 2013) longer locus length significantly decreased PCR success rates.
While age class was not statistically significant in our analyses, we found slightly higher success rates in fawn and adult female samples than adult male samples. However, due to our low sample sizes, we speculate that we lacked the power to detect the effect of age class. We  had hypothesized that adults would have greater success because of greater surface area of the pellets. The trend of higher success in females and fawns is potentially due to differences in diet, hormones and metabolic rates. No other studies have evaluated the effects of age class in faecal DNA PCR success rates, and this may be a useful direction for future analyses. Time since deposition also affected genotyping error rates, and there was an increase in average ADO and FA rates over time. ADO rates were high compared to other studies (Brinkman et al. 2010;DeMay et al. 2013). While average ADO rates changed only moderately from day 1 to day 3, some per locus error rates changed considerably, with ADO rates of one locus (ADCYC) increasing from 4% to 50%.
Maximizing sampling design for mark-recapture analyses. Our primary goal was to determine an optimal sampling interval between mark-recapture sessions. Specifically, we wanted a long enough interval to ensure samples could be collected at a rate of three times the number of individuals estimated to use the site and short enough to ensure successful genotyping of individuals of at least 80%, while balancing pronghorn disturbance and financial cost. During the hot dry months when pronghorn are stressed due to heat and lack of forage and freestanding water, minimizing pronghorn disturbance is a critical concern. To minimize pronghorn disturbance and collect more samples in each sampling session a longer time interval between sessions is desirable. However, with longer sampling intervals, number of samples removed increases, and PCR success rates decrease, thus increasing cost. For our study system, we estimate we can obtain the desired number of samples with a sampling interval of ≥4 days and maintain individual identification success rates above 80% from days 1 to 7 (Fig. 3).
Another metric of efficiency is cost per successful sample. Cost per successful sample using predicted number of successful samples (Table 4) ranged from $60 (1 day interval) to $79.49 (10 day interval), an increase of 32%. Our data indicate the optimal sampling interval would be 4-7 days to achieve the target sample size and individual ID success rates while minimizing cost per successful sample and disturbance to pronghorn.

[SECTION] implications for monitoring
The small population size and large range of Sonoran pronghorn present major challenges for faecal DNA sampling. Our proposed method of sampling at drinkers should allow collection of a large number of samples from most of the individuals visiting the drinkers and provide a more accurate population estimate than is feasible with methods such as remote cameras. One poten-tial weakness of our targeted sampling approach is that some individuals may not use drinkers, and AZGFD personnel posit this is around 30% of the total population (J. Hervert, personal communication).
Our research was conducted in summer, which is likely the most ideal season for estimating abundance for Sonoran pronghorn using NDS methods. During cooler, wetter times of year pronghorn are spread out over a large spatial area (11 000 km 2 ), and thus, sampling should be completed prior to the onset of monsoon season in July. Our results indicate rapid nDNA degradation occurs in the intense ultraviolet light and high temperatures experienced in summer conditions, thus, collection of fresh samples will maximize success. However, mtDNA species identification could be for useful for presence/absence information and occupancy analyses, and mtDNA success rates remain over 40% for up to 3 months (Woodruff et al. (2014)).
We initially predicted an intermediate interval of approximately 1-3 weeks would be the optimal gap between sampling sessions to maximize efficiency in the field and laboratory. Based on individual ID success, a sampling interval of 1-7 days would be sufficient to optimize amplification success rates; however, an interval of 1-3 days would likely give too small a sample size, and local managers attempt to limit disturbance of pronghorn at drinkers to once per week. Sampling every 4-5 days is the ideal balance between efficiency of cost, DNA degradation and deposition. However, to minimize disturbance, we propose using a 7 day sampling interval and synchronizing weekly agency personnel visits for stocking feed and water with faecal DNA sample collection. We expect that sampling at drinkers during the driest times of year, which coincides with supplemental feeding and increased drinker use, will present the best opportunity for optimum sampling efficiency.

[SECTION] conclusion
While no sampling design will fit every study, our results highlight the need to consider multiple factors in sampling design including faecal deposition rates, removal rates, DNA degradation rates, species' biology and behaviour, and the possible disturbance caused by sampling. As noted by other authors (Taberlet et al. 1999;Piggott 2004), conducting a pilot study prior to initiation of sampling is critical to informing researchers of siteand species-specific differences and will facilitate optimal sample collection approaches and to maximize sample collection and DNA amplification success rates. While faecal DNA mark-recapture methods have rarely been used for population estimation of ungulates, we believe that with effective sampling design and implementation, it is a promising approach. Based on faecal degradation rates, an NDS study of this species, or others that are uncommon and broadly distributed, might not be feasible. Therefore, the opportunity to collect fresh faecal samples where the target species is congregated (naturally or due to human intervention) allows an NDS study to be conducted. These methods could be applicable to other ungulate species and study systems where animals congregate at centralized locations, such as in African savannah ecosystems, where, for example, zebra (Equus quagga), sable antelope (Hippotragus niger), waterbuck (Kobus ellipsiprymnus) and other species gather at natural and artificial watering sites in the dry season (Cain et al. 2012) presenting an opportunity for targeted sampling of a typically broadly distributed species.
====================================================================================================
FILE: Scale samples from Temminck’s ground pangolin (Smutsia temminckii) a non-invasive source of DNA.grobid.tei (1).xml
====================================================================================================

[SECTION] title
Scale samples from Temminck's ground pangolin (Smutsia temminckii): a non-invasive source of DNA

[SECTION] (no title)
Temminck's ground pangolins' entire body is covered in overlapping scales and when threatened, they roll into a ball with the overlapping scales protecting vulnerable parts of the body (Herklots 1937). Unrolling the animals to obtain blood samples can cause unnecessary stress, pain and harm (Pietersen 2013). Pangolin scales consist of non-living keratin (Atkins 2004) therefore taking scale clippings is considered to be non-invasive. Furthermore, in forensic cases where animal parts are confiscated in both Africa (Bräutigam et al. 1994) and Asia (Challender and Hywood 2012) the most likely material that will be obtained is scales. Non-invasive sampling has been reported to have several disadvantages including low quality and quantity of isolated DNA (Taberlet et al. 1996). Various DNA isolation kits and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) enhancing reagents such as bovine serum albumin (BSA) antibody or glycerol (Nagai et al. 1998) have been developed to increase PCR amplification yield. The objective of this study was thus to compare DNA extraction methods and PCR protocols in order to obtain high quality sequences of three mitochondrial (mt) DNA loci; cytochrome c oxidase 1 (COI), cytochrome b (Cytb) and D-loop from pangolin scale samples that can be used in future to identify pangolin species in wildlife forensic cases worldwide.
Four pangolin scale samples were pulverised to powder using a dental electric micro-motor drill (Zhengzhou Xinghua Dental Equipment, Henan, China). A total of five different extraction methods were tested: (1) ZR Genomic DNA ™ -Tissue MiniPrep Kit (Zymo Research Abstract Non-invasive sampling aims to obtain suitable samples without causing harm to the study organism, thus making it a more preferred sampling technique. Molecular methods have advanced in such a way that quality DNA can be obtained from less invasive mammal samples. Various PCR enhancing techniques have also been developed to aid in amplification of low quality DNA samples, to produce reliable results that can be used to monitor populations and species or for forensic applications. Temminck's ground pangolin is one of the few mammals to be covered in scales. In this study, we attempt to identify the most appropriate DNA isolation and PCR methods as well as determine whether PCR additives could be used to improve isolation of DNA and downstream amplification of mitochondrial DNA, from scale samples collected from these pangolins. In this study, it was determined that several different methods are required in order to successfully amplify DNA, and a decision tree rather than a single method should be followed. concentrations were employed, in the form of 0.25-0.5 µl BSA or 4.25 µl (5-10 %) glycerol added to the DreamTaq PCR protocol. All PCR products were visualized on 2 % agarose gels, followed by PCR purification using exosap (Thermo Scientific). Big Dye v3.1 Terminator Kit (Applied Biosystems) was used in a sequencing reaction and the ZR DNA Sequencing Clean-up ™ Kit (Applied Biosystems) was used to remove remnants from cycle sequencing. Capillary electrophoresis was performed on an ABI3130 genetic analyser (Applied Biosystems).
The concentration and purity of DNA obtained in this study is presented in Table 1. High quality and quantity DNA from scale samples was obtained from the Qiagen, Master-Pure, REPLI-g and PrepFiler kits. Low quality and quantity DNA was obtained from the Zymo and RecoverAll kit, however downstream applications were possible and sequencing was successful in the case of the Zymo kit. Amplification was not achieved using Q-solution. The remaining PCR protocols all produced sequences that were of high quality with varying success (Supplementary, Figs. 234). The average length of sequences obtained for the three gene regions ranged between 100 and 500 bp. In this study, an overall success rate of 89 % (100/112) was achieved from four scale samples using five isolation techniques and eight PCR protocols. From this, we conclude that it is possible to amplify regions of the mtDNA genome from pangolin scale samples that is suitable for PCR. However, several different methods are required in order to successfully amplify DNA, and a decision tree (Fig. 1) rather than a single method should be followed. It was however noted in this study that the specific sample area of the scale can affect the success rate. Higher quality and quantity DNA was obtained from the base of the scale, where it is imbedded in the skin, compared to the edges of the scales. Nevertheless, the decision tree presented here can be used to amplify gene regions from non-invasive samples or low quality DNA from pangolins, for conservation research and for forensic applications and may prove successful for amplification of other types of non-invasive samples.
Corporation) using the manufactures protocol for hair, feathers or related samples; (2) QIAamp ® DNA Investigator Kit (Qiagen), following the manufacturer's protocol for hair and nail clippings; (3) RecoverAll ™ Total Nucleic Acid Isolation Kit (Applied Biosystems), following the manufacturers protocol for DNA extraction for tissue samples; (4) MasterPure ™ Complete DNA and RNA Purification Kit (Illumina Company) and the general protocol as suggested by the manufacturers and (5) AutoMate Express ™ Forensic DNA Extraction System (Applied Biosystems) along with the PrepFiler Express BTA Forensic DNA Extraction Kit (Applied Biosystems), using the manufacturer's protocols. Following extraction, the concentration of DNA was analysed on a NanoDrop ND-1000 Spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific). The integrity of the isolated DNA (quality) was determined by a 0.7 % agarose gel (Supplementary, Fig. 1). The PCR was performed to amplify three loci, namely COI, Cytb and D-loop (Supplementary, Table 1). Various PCR protocols were tested (Supplementary, Table 2) namely: (1) Dream Taq ™ Mastermix (Thermo Scientific), (2) Q-solution PCR protocol using the Taq DNA Polymerase Kit (Qiagen) and (3) REPLI-g Single Cell Kit (Qiagen) following the manufacturers protocol for amplification of purified genomic DNA along with the DNA isolated using the RecoverAll kit. In addition, different enhancers at various

