[SECTION] title
Evaluation of noninvasive genetic methods for Nubian ibex

[SECTION] abstract
their target species. Hence, studies of endangered and elusive species-that would otherwise require complicated capturing techniques-have become practical as molecular tools developed. The intestinal cells shed in animal feces have been found to be an effective source of DNA for many mammals (Beja-Pereira et al. 2009). Nevertheless, the low quantity and quality of DNA together with PCR inhibitors may result in high genotyping error rates and limit the accuracy and effectiveness of non-invasive studies (Waits and Leberg 2000). Comparative studies demonstrated the potential effects of seasonality (Maudet et al. 2004), time between feces excretion to DNA extraction (Woodruff et al. 2015) and different preservation (Tende et al. 2014) and extraction methods (Ramón-Laca et al. 2015) on amplification success and genotyping error rates. However, lack of consistency among studies emphasizes that NIGS protocols are system specific (Schwartz and Monfort 2008). Consequently, pilot studies are key for developing an efficient NIGS protocol on the target species in the research area before full-scale monitoring programs are deployed (Valière et al. 2007;Renan et al. 2012).The Nubian ibex (Capra nubiana) is classified as vulnerable by the IUCN red list of threatened species (Alkon et al. 2008). The population in Israel is under threat and hence is a subject for behavioral, spatial and genetic studies aimed at its protection. Here, we assessed different methodologies to be used for genetic monitoring of wild ibex population using non-invasive samples. More specifically, we compared the amplification success of ibex fecal DNA under two collection-preservation methods and two commercial extraction kits, as a basis for a genetic monitoring project.We used a factorial-design experiment in order to evaluate the effect the treatments have on amplification success of DNA extracted from ibex feces. Unlike the majority of studies that focus on a single experimental Abstract Noninvasive genetic methods enable the sampling of natural populations while minimizing detrimental effects on them. However, noninvasive methods are marred by DNA extraction and amplification difficulties that can be mitigated by improved methodology. Past studies have shown that noninvasive genetic protocols are system specific and highlighted the importance of pilot studies in the establishment of genetic monitoring programs. We tested, using a factorial design experiment, the effect of different methods for the collection-preservation and extraction on the amplification of DNA from Nubian ibex (Capra nubiana) fecal samples. We found collection-preservation using paper bags and extraction with QIAamp ® fast DNA stool mini kit to significantly enhance success rate compared to collection-preservation in ethanol and extraction with QIAamp ® DNA mini kit. Our results will contribute to the studies of natural populations of the vulnerable C. nubiana.

[SECTION] introduction
Non-invasive genetic sampling (NIGS) allows scientists to obtain genetic material without disturbing or even seeing stage (collection, preservation or extraction) this design enabled us to test also the interaction between the different treatments (Renan et al. 2012). The two collectionpreservation treatments chosen were (a) paper bag and (b) 96% ethanol. The first provides a dry environment while the second actively dries the pellet. Both function to reduce activity of DNA-degrading enzymes (Beja-Pereira et al. 2009;Piggott 2004). Collected samples were kept in a cooling box and later stored in a freezer (-20 °C). The two extraction methods we tested were (1) QIAamp ® DNA mini kit-designed for blood and tissue samples, and (2) QIAamp ® fast DNA stool mini kit, specifically designed to diminish the effect of PCR inhibitors. For both extraction treatments we used a modified protocol that included an initial wash of the pellets for 45 min in AL and InhibitEX buffers (supplied with the kits) for kits (1) and ( 2), respectively.
Ibex were sampled in the Negev and Judean deserts in Israel, in dry environmental conditions during winter 2016. We collected 4 fecal pellets from each of the 6 sampled ibex immediately after defecation. This way, all 4 experimental combinations were performed on each of the ibex, and between individual variance could be measured. Success rate was estimated by averaging the amplification success of 9 microsatellites (Table 1) using 2.5% agarose gel visualized under UV transilluminator. DNA was amplified in a reaction volume of 20 µl, containing 1 µl of extracted DNA, 1 unit of Taq polymerase, 1× Taq Rxn buffer, 2mM MgCl 2 , 200 µl of each dNTP and 0.5 µM of each primer. All 9 markers were amplified  using a touch-down PCR protocol (see annealing temperature, Table 1). Distilled water was used as negative control for each PCR reaction. DNA extracted from ibex blood was used as positive control, marking the band size of interest. We used a two-way ANOVA design that considered individuals as a random effect to test the significance of our results.

[SECTION] results and conclusions
The different treatments had a significant effect on PCR amplification success in both the collection-preservation phase and the extraction phase. Between the two collectionpreservation methods, the paper bag had a higher success rate (56%) compared to ethanol (38%) (two-way ANOVA; F 1, 15 = 11.91, P < 0.01; Fig. 1a). Of the two extraction kits, the stool kit yielded a 62% success rate, whereas the success rate of the blood kit was only 32% (two-way ANOVA; F 1, 15 = 24.04, P < 0.001; Fig. 1b). No significant interaction was found between the two treatments (F 1, 15 = 0.06, P = 0.80). Hence, collection-preservation with paper bag and extraction using QIAamp ® fast DNA stool mini kit proved to be the best combination as it yielded the highest success rate of 71%. This factorial designed experiment enabled us to identify an efficient combination of methods, out of commonly used methods, to obtain DNA from fecal samples of Nubian ibex in Israel. This is an initial step in a genetic monitoring project aimed at the protection of the species.

