[SECTION] title
Isolation of microsatellite loci and reliable genotyping using noninvasive samples of a critically endangered primate, Trachypithecus leucocephalus

[SECTION] abstract
Genetic information can be critical in identifying conservation priorities and developing conservation strategies.There is an urgent need for noninvasive genetic tools to study the wild populations of Asian colobine monkeys. The majority of these species are threatened with habitat destruction, population reduction and even extinction, but generally lack information on their genetic diversity and population structure. Genetic sampling and tissue collection have been scarce in these species owing to strict regulations on manipulation of endangered species, and the difficulties and risks associated with capturing these arboreal and fast-moving monkeys in the challenging environments that they inhabit. These difficulties have hindered the development of molecular genetic markers, which are usually derived from tissues or blood. In this study, we present a method for de novo microsatellite isolation and genotyping using DNA from noninvasive origins of a critically endangered Asian colobine, the white-headed langur (Trachypithecus leucocephalus). Genomic DNA isolated from hair was shown to be sufficient for microsatellite enrichment and isolation, with similar isolation efficiencies as from tissue DNA. We identified and characterized 20 polymorphic microsatellite loci, and evaluated their amplification success and genotyping reliability with 86 field-collected fecal samples. These results show that this panel of loci can produce reliable genotypes from fecal samples, and represent a useful tool for noninvasive investigation of genetic structure, individual identification and kinship assessment in this highly endangered species. Our approach can be applied to conservation genetic studies of other wild species that lack sequence information and tissue samples.

[SECTION] introduction
Asian colobines are a diverse group of primates comprising 7 genera distributed throughout South and Southeast Asia (Karanth et al. 2008). Of the 55 currently recognized species of Asian colobines, 9 (16%) are critically endangered, 23 (42%) are endangered and 9 (16%) are vulnerable as listed in the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Red List of Threatened Species (Roos et al. 2014). Many of these species are experiencing population declines due primarily to habitat loss, fragmentation and hunting (Macdonald et al. 2012). Genetic assessment of population viability is urgently needed to provide valuable guidelines for conservation and management decisions. Most Asian colobine species inhabit evergreen forests and are highly arboreal (Oates et al. 1994), making observation and genetic sampling very difficult. The lack of accurate genetic data has impeded informed conservation practice.
White-headed langurs (Trachypithecus leucocephalus Tan, 1957) are a colobine species endemic to the limestone forests in Guangxi Province, southwest China. The majority of China's 24-28 primate species are threatened with extinction (Liu et al. 2015), and this species is no exception. With a total population of less than 1000 individuals living in the wild, it is listed as critically endangered in the IUCN Red List (Bleisch et al. 2008). Analysis of mitochondrial DNA sequences indicates low genetic diversity and strong geographical differentiation both among and within local populations (Liu et al. 2013b;Wang et al. 2015). However, essential population genetic parameters at the level of social units and individuals can only be inferred from nuclear DNA markers and remain unknown. These langurs can move quickly through the tree canopies and on limestone cliffs, and it is extremely challenging to obtain genetic samples by capture. Furthermore, no population of this species is currently maintained in captivity.
Microsatellites, also known as short tandem repeats (STRs) or simple sequence repeats (SSRs), have been among the most widely used genetic markers in studies of population genetic structure, dispersal pattern, individual identification and kinship analysis (Selkoe & Toonen 2006). Identification of microsatellite loci can be achieved by cross-amplification from related species (e.g. Chambers et al. 2004), and by de novo isolation from genomic DNA of the target species (Zane et al. 2002). Cross-species amplification can be a simple and efficient approach to identify microsatellite loci in closely related species. However, the success rate for cross-species amplification may be low due to sequence variations in the primer binding regions (Scribner & Pearce 2000). In addition, highly polymorphic microsatellite loci in one species may not show similar levels of polymorphism in the related species (Morin et al. 1998). The method of de novo isolation can produce a large number of microsatellite loci, but it relies on high qual-ity genomic DNA isolated from tissue or blood samples (e.g. Muniz & Vigilant 2008), which limits its application in species for which such samples are unavailable. The applicability of noninvasive samples in de novo microsatellite isolation has yet to be investigated. Recent advances in next-generation sequencing techniques have allowed microsatellites to be developed from directly sequenced genome or transcriptome sequences (Duckett & Stow 2010;Mikheyev et al. 2010). These methods, although high throughput and very efficient, also require high quality DNA or RNA isolated from tissues to generate reliable sequencing data.
Genetic sampling by collecting tissue or blood samples requires capture and sometimes anesthetization of animals, which can be intrusive, stressful or even damaging. Noninvasive genetic sampling using DNA extracted from sources such as feces, hair, feathers and shed skin has provided a valuable alternative to tissue or blood sampling for conservation biologists (Waits & Paetkau 2005;Beja-Pereira et al. 2009). This sampling scheme circumvents tracking, catching or handling of animals, and so is particularly advantageous in studies of rare, elusive or difficult-to-capture species. However, DNA isolated from noninvasive samples tends to have lower quantity and quality, and may produce higher rates of PCR failure and genotyping errors such as false alleles and allelic dropout (Pompanon et al. 2005). False alleles are alleles that unmatch the consensus genotype (either homozygote or heterozygote), and allelic dropout is the amplification failure of one allele from a heterozygote (Broquet & Petit 2004). The higher occurrences of PCR errors associated with low-quality templates may flaw the genotyping data and derived genetic parameters. Therefore, it is important to assess the accuracy and reliability of genetic profiles based on noninvasive samples and to devise methods to reduce error rates (Taberlet et al. 1996;Broquet & Petit 2004).
Previous studies isolated microsatellites for the white-headed langur from the blood (Sun et al. 2010) and by cross-amplification of human loci (Liu et al. 2013a), but these loci showed low amplification success with fecal DNA in our laboratory (data not shown). The objective of the present study was to isolate a sufficient number of polymorphic microsatellite loci for accurate conservation genetic analysis of the white-headed langur based on noninvasive samples. We compared the efficiencies of de novo microsatellite isolation from DNA of noninvasive (hair) and tissue (muscle) origins, characterized the identified loci, and evaluated the amplification success and genotyping reliability with field-collected fecal samples.

[SECTION] study area and populations
Samples of the white-headed langur were collected from the wild in Chongzuo National Nature Reserve (22°10′43″-22°36′55″ N, 107°16′53″-107°59′46″ E) in Guangxi Province, China (Fig. 1). The native habitat is Karst limestone hills and valleys dominated by seasonal rain forests. The langurs are distributed mainly in Fusui (FS) and Chongzuo (CZ) Townships within the nature reserve. Bisexual social groups are the main social organization of this species, which consist of 3-30 (mean = 11.7) individuals, including 1 adult male, 1-14 (mean = 5.1) adult females and associated immatures (Jin et al. 2009). A population census in 2010 identified a total of 110 social groups in these 2 areas, accounting for over 92% of all extant populations of white-headed langurs (Chongzuo Nature Reserve 2010). The 2 areas are approximately 50 km in the shortest distance and separated mostly by flat farmlands and human settlements. It seems unlikely that langurs could move between the 2 areas at high rates. Therefore, we consider FS and CZ 2 separate local populations.

[SECTION] hair and fecal collection and storage
We collected hair and fecal samples of wild white-headed langurs in January from 2012 to 2014. Hair samples were collected from the sticky sap on a banyan tree that a social group frequently visited, and were stored in sterile tubes at -20 °C.
Fecal samples were collected from 30 social groups across FS (20 groups) and CZ (10 groups) Townships, representing approximately one-quarter of the total population. Social groups use specific locations on the limestone cliffs as sleeping sites, and their feces accumulate on the ground beneath these sites. We collected fresh (less than 3 days old) fecal pellets using disposable gloves. Fresh feces could be identified based on the lighter color and moist and smooth surface appearance. The samples were stored in 95% ethanol at a volume of 4 to 5 times the size of the fecal pellets at ambient temperature for up to 2 weeks, and transferred to -20 °C in the laboratory.
Muscle tissue was collected from a langur infant that was injured and died during a male takeover event in 2013. The body was retrieved within one day of death, and the muscle samples were collected and stored at -20 °C in the field and transferred to -80 °C in the laboratory.

[SECTION] isolation of langur dna
Extraction of DNA from hair follicles was conducted using the One-tube Hair DNAup for PCR kit (Sangon Biotech, Shanghai, China), which allows DNA extraction from a small number of hairs in a single tube in 40 min. We used 8 hairs (cutting approximately 5 mm Isolation of DNA from muscle tissue was carried out using the standard salt-extraction method (Aljanabi & Martinez 1997).
Extraction of DNA from fecal samples was conducted using the 2CTAB/PCI method (Vallet et al. 2007). This method showed higher DNA extraction yields and subsequent PCR amplification success from feces of vegetarian primates compared with other methods (Lathuillière et al. 2001). Approximately 200 mg of feces taken from the surface of a fecal pellet was used in each extraction. We added an absorption step with 250 mg potato starch following the initial lysis step to reduce PCR inhibitors in the extracts (Deuter et al. 1995). The final DNA was dissolved in 200 μL distilled H 2 O. The concentrations of DNA were determined using a NanoDrop 2000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific) and by agarose gel electrophoresis, and were generally in the range of 100-300 ng/μL. Fecal DNA extracts were then purified using the EasyPure PCR Purification Kit (TansGen Biotech, Beijing, China) and stored at -20 to -80 °C. A mitochondrial fragment of approximately 400 bp was PCR amplified using the extracts to check DNA quality. Only DNA extracts that showed amplification were used for further analysis. Negative controls containing no feces or tissue were processed with the samples and included in PCR of the mitochondrial fragment to check for contamination during DNA extraction and PCR.

[SECTION] de novo isolation of microsatellite markers
Isolation of microsatellite markers from the genomic DNA was conducted using the Fast Isolation by AFLP of Sequences COntaining repeats (FIASCO) method by Zane et al. (2002) with minor modifications. Digestion of 8 μL of hair DNA extraction or 400 ng of muscle DNA was carried out with MseI (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA, USA), followed by ligation with MseI AFLP adaptors. After PCR amplification with MseI adaptor-specific primers for 18 cycles, 15 μL of PCR products were mixed with biotinylated (CA) 15 and (AGAT) 8 probes (20 pmol each) in a total volume of 50 μL. These repeat sequences are among the most frequently occurring microsatellite motifs in vertebrate genomes (Zane et al. 2002). After denaturation and hybridization with biotinylated probes, DNA was mixed and incubated with streptavidin coated beads (Promega, Madison, WI, USA), followed by 3 nonstringent and 4 stringent washes.
Captured microsatellite-containing DNA fragments were separated from the beads-probe complex by 2 elution steps (Zane et al. 2002). Five microliters of each elution product were subjected to PCR amplifications with AFLP adaptor-specific primers, and the PCR products were visualized by agarose gel electrophoresis to confirm amplified fragments as a smear in the range of 200-1000 bp.
The PCR products were cloned using a TA cloning kit (pEASY-T1 Cloning Kit, TransGen Biotech, Beijing, China) and positive clones of transformed E. coli were selected. We selected 300 positive clones isolated from hair DNA and 400 clones from muscle DNA to be sequenced with the M13 primers on an ABI 3730xl DNA Analyzer (Applied Biosystems).

[SECTION] microsatellite screening and genotyping
Sequences of cloned DNA were analyzed using the software SSRHunter (Li & Wan 2005) to identify putative microsatellites using the following criteria: (i) sequence containing repetitive motifs of 2-6 bp; and (ii) motifs repeating for a minimum of 5 times. We removed redundant sequences and designed PCR primers for all putative microsatellite loci with suitable flanking sequences using the software Primer Premier 6.0 (http:// www.PremierBiosoft.com).
Primers were tested in PCR amplification of fecal DNA with 1 μL DNA extracts in 1× EasyTaq PCR Su-perMix (TransGen Biotech), 0.4 mg/mL bovine serum albumin and 0.25 μM of each primer in a total volume of 10 μL. Two fecal DNA extracts were used for initial screening of primers in a PCR program starting with denaturation at 95 °C for 5 min, followed by 37 cycles of 30 s denaturation at 95 °C, 45 s at 1 of 7 annealing temperatures (T a ) evenly spanning the range of recommended T a ± 6 °C, and 45 s elongation at 72 °C, and 10 min at 72 °C for final elongation. Negative PCRs containing no DNA template were included in each run to check for contamination. Amplification success and optimal T a was checked by native polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE). Primers that amplified distinct bands within expected size ranges were further tested in PCRs with 12 fecal DNA extracts from different individuals (each from a different social group) at the optimal T a of each locus and checked by PAGE. Only primers that showed product length polymorphism and high amplification success rates (> 60%) were then labeled with fluorescent dyes (FAM, HEX or TAMRA, to the forward primers) and further evaluated in PCR using 30 fecal DNA samples each from a different social group across FS and We used a multiple-tube method to determine a consensus genotype for each fecal sample (Frantz et al. 2003). Between 3 and 5 PCR replicates (successful amplifications) were conducted per locus. At least 3 independent homozygote PCR results were required for a homozygous genotype, and each allele had to be amplified in at least 2 independent PCRs for a heterozygous genotype.

[SECTION] data analysis
Deviation from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE) and linkage disequilibrium (LD) were assessed for all isolated microsatellite loci with GENEPOP version 4.2 (Raymond & Rousset 1995) using the default settings. As demographically independent local populations may reach HWE at different allele frequencies, we tested HWE and LD within each local population (FS, n = 20; CZ, n = 10) separately and together across all samples. All results of multiple comparisons were adjusted by sequential Bonferroni correction (Rice 1989).
We used the software CERVUS version 3.0.7 (Kalinowski et al. 2007) to calculate the number of alleles (N A ), observed (H O ) and expected (H E ) heterozygosities, and the software POPGENE version 1.32 (Yeh et al. 1997) to calculate the number of effective alleles (N e ) for each locus. We also estimated allelic richness (A R ) using the rarefaction method in HP-RARE (Kalinowski 2005) and polymorphic information content (PIC) with CERVUS.
The presence of null alleles (F null ) was evaluated with MICRO-CHECKER version 2.2.3 (van Oosterhout et al. 2004) at 95% confidence intervals with 1000 randomizations. Because the estimation of null alleles was based on the assumptions of HWE, we conducted this analysis for each local population separately and across all samples.
We calculated the probabilities of identity for unrelated individuals (P (ID) ) and siblings (P (ID)sib ) at each locus and across loci as described by Waits et al. (Waits et al. 2001) using GENALEX version 6.501 (Peakall & Smouse 2012). Cumulative P (ID) and P (ID)sib were calculated by ranking the PIC values of the loci from high to low. We used the criterion of P (ID) less than 0.001 and P (ID)sib less than 0.01 for the estimation of the minimum number of loci required for individual identification in the study species (Waits et al. 2001).
To test the discriminating power of the microsatellite loci, we identified different individuals from 53 fecal samples of a social group with GENALEX using genotyping data of the 10 loci with the highest PIC values, and calculated Nei's standard genetic distance (Ds;Nei 1978) between the identified individuals by the software POPULATIONS version 1.2.32 (http://bioinformatics. org/populations/). A neighbor joining phylogenetic tree was constructed based on the distance matrix by the software SPLITSTREE4 version 4.13.1 (Huson & Bryant 2006), and displayed using the EQUALANGLE algorithm implemented in the software.
The reliability of genotyping using isolated loci was evaluated with DNA isolated from 86 fecal samples collected across FS and CZ. PCR amplification success rates were calculated as the percentage of successful PCRs of all PCR trials. Genotyping error was evaluated by calculating false alleles and allelic dropout rates using GIMLET version 1.3.3 (Valière 2002). We also estimated genotyping accuracy rates and the quality indexes (QIs) per locus, per sample and across all loci and samples (i.e. global QI). Genotyping accuracy rates were calculated as the percentage of PCRs that matched the consensus genotype over all successful PCRs (Wultsch et al. 2014), and the QIs were calculated as the percentage of PCRs that matched the consensus genotype over all PCR trials (Miquel et al. 2006). Both values can vary from zero to one.
Statistical tests were carried out in SPSS 20 software. All tests were 2-tailed, and the significance level was set at 0.05.

[SECTION] isolation of microsatellite markers from hair and tissue dna
A total of 700 clones (300 derived from hair DNA and 400 from muscle DNA) from de novo isolation of microsatellite were sequenced. Together 478 clones (68%; 202 from hair DNA and 276 from muscle DNA) were found to contain repetitive motifs, of which we could design primers for 361 sequences. A total of 205 primer pairs successfully amplified PCR products at expected sizes, of which 83 loci (33 from hair DNA and 50 from muscle DNA) exhibited allelic length polymorphism with 12 fecal DNA extracts. Excluding the loci with low amplification success (<60%) and low heterozygosities (H O < 0.2), we selected 24 microsatellite loci (12 from hair DNA and 12 from muscle DNA) for fur- ther screening. The percentages of microsatellite-containing clones, successfully amplified loci, polymorphic loci and the final selected loci were similar for isolation from hair and muscle DNA (Wilcoxon signed-rank test, n = 5, Z = -1.761, P = 0.08; Fig. 2).

[SECTION] characterization of microsatellites and genotyping using fecal dna
We analyzed the 24 microsatellite loci with fluorescent-labeled primers and 30 fecal DNA extracts each from a different group in the FS and CZ populations. None of the loci exhibited significant linkage disequilib-   rium following sequential Bonferroni correction. However,  in FS showed the lowest P-value (0.0003) that approached significance, and we excluded WT-192 in the final panel of loci. One of the loci (WHL-164) displayed significant deviations from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in FS and total population, but not in CZ. In addition, the software MI-CRO-CHECKER showed the presence of null alleles in 2 loci (WHL-22 and WT-30) in FS, but not in CZ or total population.
Excluding these 4 loci (WT-192, WHL-164, WHL-22 and WT-30), a total of 20 microsatellite loci were selected as the finalized panel for genotyping (Table 1). Microsatellite sequences of loci were deposited in Gen-Bank under the Accession nos. KT148864-KT148883. These loci showed 2 to 7 alleles per locus, and relatively low genetic variations, as indicated by low to moderate values of effective alleles (N e ), allelic richness (A R ), observed and expected heterozygosities (H O and H E ) and polymorphic information content (PIC) in the total population (Table 2).  Cumulative P (ID) and P (ID)sib values were calculated for estimation of the minimum number of loci for individual identification (Fig. 3). A minimum of 4 loci were required to reach P (ID) < 0.001 and 5 loci to reach P (ID) < 0.0001, whereas a minimum of 6 loci were needed for P (ID)sib < 0.01 and 10 loci for P (ID)sib < 0.001. Therefore, 10 loci would be sufficient for individual identification in the population with a high statistical confidence.
To test the discriminating power of the loci with empirical data, we genotyped 53 fecal samples of a social group from CZ at the 10 loci with the highest PIC val-ues, of which 23 different individuals were identified. The neighbor-joining tree based on the Nei's standard genetic distance showed varying degrees of relatedness between the individuals (Fig. 4), suggesting that these loci could distinguish members of a family and provide an adequate resolution for genetic analysis at the individual level.
With 86 randomly selected fecal DNA extracts, we found that amplification success rates varied from 84.6% to 95.0% across the 20 loci. Allelic dropout rates of the loci varied from 2.4% to 17.3%, and false alleles  ranged from 0 to 5.1%. Genotyping accuracy rates were in the range of 90.0% to 98.4%, and the QI of the loci varied from 0.84 to 0.97 (Table 3). The QIs of the samples ranged from 1.00 to 0.21 (mean = 0.90, SD = 0.15), with 92% (79/86) of the samples above 0.70 and 98% (84/86) of the samples above 0.50. The global QI across all loci and samples was 0.85. We determined a consensus genotype for mean (SD) = 96.3% (2.1) of the fecal samples (80-86 out of 86 samples) per locus.

[SECTION] discussion
This is the first study that has isolated microsatellite markers de novo using noninvasive samples, and we have provided a panel of loci that can produce reliable genotypes for genetic analysis at population and individual level from fecal samples.
Plucked or shed hair of wild and captive mammals has been used as a noninvasive DNA source for genetic studies, including individual identification, parentage determination and mating structure analysis (Nievergelt et al. 2000;Sloane et al. 2000), but its applicability has not been tested in de novo microsatellite isolation. Our protocol for microsatellite isolation employs a small number of hairs, and shows similar efficiencies in all steps of microsatellite isolation and screening in comparison to isolation from muscle-derived DNA. Because hair can be collected noninvasively and relatively easily using hair traps (e.g. Oka & Takenaka 2001), our method provides a feasible alternative approach for genetic marker development in endangered and difficult-to-capture species. As hair follicles usually contain a very small amount of DNA, hairs from different individuals of the target species can be pooled for DNA extraction to increase genomic DNA input (Alpers et al. 2003). Identification of microsatellite loci can be achieved either by cloning and Sanger sequencing, as in this study, or by next-generation sequencing for high-throughput isolation (e.g. Santana et al. 2009).
We used exclusively fecal-derived DNA in microsatellite characterization to identify high-performance loci for future genetic studies based on noninvasive samples. Genotyping using fecal samples as DNA sources tends to show low amplification success and high error rates, mainly due to the low concentration and quality of target DNA and inclusion of PCR-inhibiting compounds in fecal DNA extractions (Pompanon et al. 2005;Beja-Pereira et al. 2009). Fecal DNA degradation can be severe due to exposure to environmental conditions, such as temperature, humidity, sun, rain and microbial growth (Nsubuga et al. 2004). In addition, the influence of PCR inhibitors have been reported to be more eminent in fecal extracts of herbivorous species (Launhardt et al. 1998;Lathuillière et al. 2001). Most Asian colobines are inhabitants of tropical rain forest environments characterized by high temperature and humidity, and their diet is typically highly folivorous, making genetic analysis based on fecal samples particularly challenging. In addition to the commonly used storage method of ethanol preservation of feces at -20 °C, we have applied a number of procedures to increase PCR success and genotyping reliability, including: (i) using fresh fecal samples collected during the winter dry season to improve the quality of DNA templates; (ii) adding CTAB and starch in the DNA extraction process to remove potential PCR inhibitors; (iii) screening microsatellites using fecal DNA and selecting loci with high amplification success and low error rates to increase PCR efficiency and accuracy; and (iv) employing the multitube approach to minimize the effect of random errors and improve overall genotyping reliability.
We estimated several parameters to assess genotyping performance of the microsatellite loci, including the rate of PCR amplification success, allelic dropout (ADO), false alleles (FA), genotyping accuracy and the QIs. Amplification success describes PCR efficiency of a locus, which is influenced by the template quality and quantity as well as primer design. ADO and FA each reflect a specific type of PCR error that can lead to genotyping mistakes (Taberlet et al. 1999;Valière 2002), whereas genotyping accuracy and the QIs are estimators of the overall reliability of genotyping data (Clozato et al. 2014;Wultsch et al. 2014). Compared with other genetic studies based on fecal DNA samples, our amplification success per locus (85-95%) was similar or higher (70%, Lathuillière et al. 2001;79%, Morin et al. 2001;62-95%, Bradley et al. 2000;47-89%, Wultsch et al. 2014), and our FA (0-5%) and ADO (2-17%) were comparable to those in other studies (FA 8%, ADO 27%, Frantz et al. 2003; FA 13-20%, ADO 0-6%, Lathuillière et al. 2001; FA 1-5%, ADO 7-32%, Ferreira da Silva et al. 2014; FA 0.5-3.8%, ADO 9-21%, Wultsch et al. 2014). Genotyping reliability measured by genotyping accuracy per locus (90-98%, this study; 77-87%, Lathuillière et al. 2001;86-94%, Wultsch et al. 2014) and the global QI (0.85, this study; 0.37-0.63, Miquel et al. 2006) were relatively high. In addition, the QIs analyzed per sample can also provide an evaluation of sam- ple quality and help to estimate the sample collection effort for genotyping studies (Miquel et al. 2006). Depending on the objectives of the study and the sample type employed, a QI threshold can be determined and applied to sample selection (e.g. QI > 0.625, Miquel et al. 2006;QI > 0.55, Ferreira da Silva et al. 2014;QI > 0.4, Polanc et al. 2012). The majority of our field-collected samples showed high QIs, as 98% of samples had a QI > 0.5, 92% of samples had a QI > 0.7, and 84% of samples had a QI > 0.8. Samples with a low QI value can be excluded in further analysis to improve data accuracy. The efficiency and reliability of these results indicate that our methods of sample collection, DNA extraction and genotyping are valid for molecular genetic analysis in the white-headed langur.
The probability of identity estimates of the isolated microsatellite loci showed high discriminatory power for population and individual level studies using P (ID) sib < 0.01 as the criterion (Mills et al. 2000;Waits et al. 2001). This resolving power is sufficient for analysis of population structure, individual identification and kinship assessment, even in the case of close relatedness that is often found among individuals of the philopatric sex in small social groups of primates (Di Fiore 2012).
Asian colobines exhibit exceedingly diverse morphological characteristics, ecological adaptations and social organizations, and study of these species will provide valuable insight into primate evolution and adaptive radiation. However, many of these species are among the most threatened yet least investigated primates (Roos et al. 2014). Genetic data are in great need for assessing their demographic parameters, population structure and dispersal patterns, and deriving proper conservation strategies and management actions accordingly. The protocol for microsatellite isolation and genotyping presented in this study requires no a priori sequence information of the study species, relies entirely on noninvasive samples (hair and feces), and employs experimental techniques and equipment accessible to most molecular biology laboratories. We have demonstrated that a trace amount of sample from a fecal pellet can provide sufficient DNA for reliable genotyping and individual identification, enabling noninvasive and accurate genetic analysis of the study species. We encourage the use and optimization of such approaches in studies of other endangered Asian colobines to gain much-needed information regarding their population structure, genetic diversity and reproductive strategy, and inform future conservation practice to restore population viability and reduce the risk of extinction.

