[SECTION] title
Identifying Gray Wolf Packs and Dispersers Using Noninvasive Genetic Samples

[SECTION] abstract
Many animals, including gray wolves (Canis lupus), live in social groups. Genetic techniques can help reveal the structure and composition of social groups, providing valuable information about group and population dynamics. We evaluated the effectiveness of using noninvasive genetic sampling (NGS) of fecal and hair samples at wolf rendezvous sites combined with spatial and genetic assignment criteria for assigning individuals to packs, detecting dispersers and lone wolves, determining the number of packs in an area, and obtaining group metrics. We applied this approach in 4 study areas covering 13,182 km 2 in Idaho, USA while concurrently monitoring wolves using telemetry techniques. We assigned pack affiliation to 78-97% of individuals across study areas and identified 12 potential dispersers. We detected a successful gene flow event by reconstructing a breeding male's genotype and tracing it back to a pack of origin using genetic assignment techniques. Average pack size was consistent between our NGS-and telemetry-based counts ( x ¼ 10 for both), and both methods detected similar age composition within groups (31% pups and 69% adults for NGS and 33% pups and 67% adults for telemetry). Our NGS approach has the advantage of providing pack metrics including sex ratio, inferred breeders, and intra-pack relatedness that telemetry and observational techniques alone cannot. This NGS field sampling strategy combined with our pack assignment method was successful and provides an approach for characterizing functional social groups in the absence of previously acquired NGS, telemetry, or other observational data that may not be available when sampling new areas.

[SECTION] (no title)
Many large carnivores live in social groups, including spotted hyenas (Crocuta crocuta), lions (Panthera leo), and gray wolves (Canis lupus). The evolutionary benefits of group living include increased fitness through cooperative hunting, increased survival of young through alloparental care, and better territory defense (MacDonald 1983, Krause and Ruxton 2002, Mech and Boitani 2003). Examining the structure and dynamics of these social groups is a key component in behavioral ecology, informative of populationlevel dynamics, and important for effective conservation and management. Obtaining data on every individual in social groups of large mammals is often difficult, and the capture and handling of these species is expensive and field intensive. Thus, we evaluated the potential of noninvasive genetic sampling (NGS) for tracking the dynamics of social carnivores using the gray wolf as a model species.
Gray wolf populations are composed primarily of packs and lone individuals. A wolf pack can be as small as 2 wolves but generally consists of a breeding pair and their offspring from 1 or more years (i.e., !l yr olds as helpers and nonbreeding animals). Unrelated wolves can exist in packs as adoptees; however, the prevalence is unknown (Lehman et al. 1992, Jedrzejewski et al. 2005). Also, multiple breeding events and multiple litters within a pack have been documented, but the frequency of occurrence is unknown (VonHoldt et al. 2008, Rutledge et al. 2010). Two potential hypotheses for such events include high exploitation (Ballard et al. 1987) and ample resources (Mech et al. 1998). Lone wolves may be temporary dispersers or true lone individuals (Mech and Boitani 2003). Pack dynamics vary within and among populations, and can be greatly affected by exploitation. Unexploited packs are more stable than those subject to harvest (Rutledge et al. 2010) and packs with less breeder turnover have higher pup survival than those with frequent breeder turnover (Brainerd et al. 2008). Additionally, in looking at recruitment in years with and without harvest, Ausband et al. (2015) reported a decrease in recruitment in years with harvest. Last, wolf packs occupy territories that are dynamic or overlapping (Mech andBoitani 2003, Jedrzejewski et al. 2007), thus making it challenging to definitively assign individuals to their respective packs by location alone.
The gray wolf population in the northern Rocky Mountains primarily has been monitored using capture and telemetry-based techniques that require that !1 individual per pack is radio-collared and tracked to obtain visual pack size counts (Mech et al. 1998, Burch et al. 2005). Expansion of this population plus the addition of an annual harvest have made these traditional monitoring methods impractical to implement on a large scale. More recently, NGS techniques have been implemented to monitor wolf populations in Europe and North America (Lucchini et al. 2002, Marucco et al. 2009, Stenglein et al. 2010b, Ausband et al. 2014, Caniglia et al. 2014). Ausband et al. (2010) developed a predictive habitat model that identifies highly probable gray wolf rendezvous sites, enabling researchers to efficiently target and sample wolves during the pup-rearing season. Combining this predictive habitat model with NGS of rendezvous sites, researchers reported agreement between NGS-and telemetry-derived population estimates for gray wolves in Idaho, USA (Stenglein et al. 2010b, Stansbury et al. 2014). By conducting additional analyses and increasing the number of genotyped loci, Stenglein et al. (2011) investigated pack structure by reconstructing pedigrees for 5 wolf packs. Most recently, studies have emerged (Caniglia et al. 2014, Andersen et al. 2015) that use spatial and genetic data to assign individuals to packs and investigate pack structure. These methods are valuable for social species because they provide a means to understand populationlevel dynamics by focusing on the population's elemental functional unit (i.e., packs for wolves), that in turn will improve conservation and management of these social species. Explicit and simple testing of these methods against known population metrics using standardized monitoring methods (i.e., radio-telemetry) can provide additional insight on the contribution of these methods for conservation and management.
Our objective was to evaluate the effectiveness of using spatial and genetic data obtained through NGS at predicted wolf rendezvous sites to distinguish groups and assign individuals to packs for wolves in Idaho, USA. Specifically, we aimed to determine the number of packs, investigate pack characteristics (including pack size, sex ratio, age structure, intra-pack relatedness), prevalence of adoptees (i.e., unrelated individuals), reproductive activity, and the proportion of non-pack members, including dispersing and lone wolves. We applied this approach in 4 study areas in Idaho, USA, while a separate, independent crew concurrently collected data using telemetry techniques, thus providing the unique opportunity to compare monitoring methods. We predicted that the NGS method would detect all packs monitored independently with telemetry, the number of wolves assigned to packs would be similar or slightly higher than those obtained through radio-telemetry, and all study areas would contain dispersers and lone individuals with evidence of movement between all areas. Additionally, because of harvest and subsequent changes to pack composition (Rutledge et al. 2010), we evaluated the potential of NGS to track changes in wolf packs subject to harvest.

[SECTION] study area
We conducted NGS and telemetry surveys in 4 study areas (Fig. 1). In 2009, we sampled the Central (Game Management Unit [GMU] 6), East (GMU 28), and West (GMU 33,34,and 35) study areas. In 2010, we re-sampled the Central study area (GMU 6), to provide an opportunity to compare data pre-and post-2009-2010 harvest, and added the North study area (GMU 1). These 4 study areas, comprising 13,182 km 2 , are predominately mountainous and dominated by ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa), Douglas fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii glauca), grand fir (Abies grandis), lodgepole pine (Pinus contorta), western hemlock (Tsuga heterophylla), western red cedar (Thuja plicata), and Engelmann spruce (Picea englemannii) forest species. The East and West sites have summer temperatures ranging from 48C to 318C and winter temperatures ranging À148C to 48C with an average annual precipitation of 42 cm and 62 cm, respectively. The Central and North sites have summer temperatures ranging from 88C to 298C and winter temperatures ranging from 08C to 58C and an average annual precipitation 71 cm and 56 cm, respectively (Western Regional Climate Center 2011).

[SECTION] field methods
The Idaho Department of Fish and Game, Nez Perce Tribe, and University of Montana conducted annual telemetrybased monitoring efforts, which included trapping using padded foothold traps and fitting !1 individual(s) from packs with very high frequency (VHF) or global positioning system (GPS) radio-collars (Telonics, Inc., Mesa, AZ, USA) within the study areas; taking a tissue sample via ear biopsy, when possible, to provide a known genetic reference sample; and tracking individuals through ground searches and aerial observations from a fixed-wing airplane (2 times monthly during summer) to determine pack size and conduct pup counts. Capture and handling methods were designed and approved by the Nez Perce Tribe and formed the basis of an approved permit from the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at The University of Montana (008-90 09MMMCWRU-031009). Additionally, an independent ground crew of 2 individuals focused on locating and obtaining pup counts for study packs. Such efforts consisted of hiking to areas where collars indicated wolves had localized, or concentrated their movements, and waiting to observe pups. If pups were not observable after several hours (e.g., >3 hr), observers would howl in an attempt to entice wolf pups closer for a successful visual count. We conducted ground-based telemetry surveys for pups until reproduction was verified and we were confident a complete pup count was attained. We conducted NGS surveys from mid-June to mid-August in 2009 (i.e., East, Central, West) and from mid-June to mid-July in 2010 (i.e., Central, North; Fig. 1). Detailed field sampling methods are described in Stenglein et al. (2010b) and Stansbury et al. (2014), and only key aspects or protocol changes are summarized here. We applied the predictive habitat model described by Ausband et al. (2010) to identify highly probable rendezvous sites (!70% suitability). We surveyed predicted sites at dawn and dusk when wolves are most active (Harrington and Mech 1982). Upon arrival at a site, 1 technician howled and waited for a response. If the technician did not hear a response, we surveyed the site for 30-45 minutes for wolf sign. If wolves reciprocated the howl or were observed (i.e., classified as an active rendezvous site), we searched extensively to locate the activity center. Upon locating an activity center (i.e., characterized by trampled vegetation and high concentrations of scat and hair), we sampled for scat and hair within a 500-m radius around the activity center. After we detected and sampled an active rendezvous site, we excluded other predicted rendezvous sites within a 6.4-km radius from surveys to avoid duplicate sampling of packs and increase the efficiency of the approach (Ausband et al. 2010). We also collected adult scats opportunistically as we traveled between predicted rendezvous sites. We collected scat samples by removing a small portion (i.e., size of a pencil eraser) from the side of the scat (Stenglein et al. 2010a) and stored samples in a 2-ml vial containing DETs buffer (Frantzen et al. 1998). We classified age of individuals from scats as pup or adult based on diameter (i.e., <2.54 cm and !2.54cm, respectively; Ausband et al. 2010) measured using calipers. We used sterilized forceps to collect hair found snagged on trees or distinct tufts on the ground and stored collected hair in envelopes with silica. We analyzed samples at the Laboratory for Ecological, Evolutionary and Conservation Genetics (LEECG) at the University of Idaho, USA. We extracted DNA from scat and hair samples using Qiagen kits (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA) as described in Stenglein et al. (2010b) and included a negative control to test for contamination. We initially screened all samples in a species-identification test (SpID) using a 3-primer mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) control region polymerase chain reaction (PCR; Murphy et al. 2000, Dal en et al. 2004, Onorato et al. 2006, De Barba et al. 2014; see online Supporting Information for details) to remove non-target species (e.g., coyote [Canis latrans]) and lowquality samples (Lucchini et al. 2002). We attempted to genotype all samples identified as wolf or dog using 9 nuclear DNA microsatellite loci as described in Stansbury et al. (2014). Any samples appearing to match other samples at all but 1 locus were analyzed at an additional 10 loci for verification (see online Supporting Information). We initially amplified all samples twice for genotyping; we required successful amplification of alleles at !5 loci for the sample to continue for an additional 1-3 PCRs, whereas we discarded samples that amplified at <5 loci. For each locus, we required !2 independent PCR amplifications for consensus of a heterozygote and !3 independent PCR amplifications for consensus of a homozygote. We included a negative control in all PCRs to test for contamination. Given the potentially large number of first-degree relatives in our dataset, we required !7 completed loci to consider a sample successfully genotyped and !8 loci (P (ID) sibs ranging 0.000354-0.00118 across study areas; Waits et al. 2001) to confirm multiple detections of the same individual. We compared all consensus genotypes and all unique genotypes of previously identified individuals using GENALEX (Peakall and Smouse 2006) to match samples and distinguish unique genotypes. To avoid overestimation and account for undetected genotyping errors, we grouped samples mismatching by allelic dropout at only 1 locus (e.g., 102, 102 vs. 102, 106) as a single individual (Adams and Waits 2007). We used RELIOTYPE (Miller et al. 2002) to test the accuracy of unique genotypes represented by only 1 noninvasive sample (i.e., single detections) by ensuring the genotype attained a 95% accuracy threshold. We then genotyped 66 known wolves from collaring efforts, 17 domestic dogs, and 40 coyotes to serve as reference samples. We used these reference samples to perform a second species confirmation analysis on all unique genotypes in program STRUCTURE v2.3.3 (Pritchard et al. 2000). We ran the analysis at K ¼ 3 under the general admixture model, with a burn-in of 100,000, and 500,000 Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) repetitions and 10 iterations to estimate individual ancestry and remove highly probable dogs or coyotes from the dataset. In addition, we calculated genetic diversity, allelic richness heterozygosity, and Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium for all study areas (see online Supporting Information).

[SECTION] pack assignment
We assigned individuals identified through NGS to putative packs with and without the aid of previous NGS data and data from collared wolves. We present the assignment protocol of individuals identified through NGS to putative packs blindly (i.e., blind assignment) because it may serve most useful to apply in areas where previous telemetry-based data are unavailable. We also conducted an informed assignment where we included genotypes of radio-collared wolves or any other genotypes from wolves in our database and individuals identified through NGS from previous studies (Stenglein et al. 2010b(Stenglein et al. , 2011) ) to aid in assignments and pack affiliation (see blind vs. informed methods in Supporting Information). First, we required !3 individuals to qualify as a putative pack (Rutledge et al. 2010). Fewer individuals (i.e., 2) may constitute the biological definition of a pack, but using a smaller requirement was not a practical means of grouping individuals with these methods because the number of packs would be inflated. We then assigned individuals to packs based on 2 criteria: spatial, where pack members share a common spatial location so individuals must be sampled at !1 common site(s) (i.e., surveyed predicted rendezvous site); and genetic, where an individual must exhibit relatedness to other individuals in the putative pack as determined by !1 of 2 genetic analysis techniques (STRUCTURE, Pritchard et al. 2000;ML-RELATE, Kalinowski et al. 2006). For ML-RELATE, we required an individual to exhibit !50% of all pair-wise relatedness values at the full-sib (FS) or parent-offspring (PO) level (r ¼ 0.5) to other members of the putative pack. STRUCTURE evaluates the number of genetic clusters (K) or populations (in our case putative packs) in the sample and assigns a probability (q-value or ancestry value) of that individual descending from a given population or group. Pritchard et al. (2000) explained that a dataset containing closely related individuals (or potential packs) may produce inflated Kvalues, where K may represent family lineages. Examples of this are reported in the literature for the Finnish wolf population (Aspi et al. 2006) and in sampling for steelhead (Oncorhynchus mykiss) in California, USA (Anderson and Dunham 2008). Because we were interested in differentiating among family groups, we anticipated these inflated K values would serve well as representative number of packs, each cluster representing a unique pack lineage. For each study area, we ran a general admixture model in STRUCTURE with correlated allele frequencies within populations, with a burn-in of 100,000 and 500,000 MCMC repetitions where K ¼ 1-15 and 10 iterations. We evaluated the optimal K in program STRUCTURE HARVESTER (Earl and VonHoldt 2011) using the highest mean ln probability of data (Pritchard et al. 2000). Once we determined K, we required individuals to exhibit a q ! 0.7 to be considered part of a putative pack. Last, if 2 putative packs were assigned to the same spatial location (i.e., they both occurred at the same rendezvous site but were divided into 2 packs because they did not meet the genetic criteria), they were considered the same pack. This criterion served as a net so to not overestimate the number of packs because of events such as breeder turnover or multiple breeding that may disrupt the assumption of highly related pack members needed by this method.

[SECTION] pack characteristics
We determined pack size by the number of assigned individuals. We simplified age structure by assigning individuals identified as either adult or pups-of-the-year. After we genotyped samples, we found 22% of individuals had scats identified by size as both pup and adult. We determined age for those individuals by the majority consensus of all samples sharing that genotype (e.g., 4 adult scats and 1 pup scat ¼ adult). Because we targeted rendezvous sites, we expected to sample each pup multiple times. We had a higher than expected frequency of singlecaptured pup samples (n ¼ 10), which led us to re-evaluate the age of these individuals using a conservative genetic approach. The genetic-based rule re-assigned pups as adults (n ¼ 2) if they exhibited !2 allele discrepancies with inferred parents or the rest of the pack. We determined sex ratio for adults, pups, and total members of a pack. We classified packs as reproductively active if !1 pup was present in the pack. In reproductively active packs, we inferred breeders using exclusion analysis allowing 1 allele mismatch and calculated the pair-wise relatedness between inferred breeders using the Triadic IBD method (Wang 2007) in program COANCESTRY version 1 (Wang 2011). In 2 cases, we did not sample 1 breeder but were able to reconstruct the genotype based on the pups' genotypes and the other inferred breeder's genotype. We ran the reconstructed genotypes in program STRUCTURE and ML-RELATE to assess the source pack of the inferred breeders and relatedness to the rest of the respective pack. We calculated the average intra-pack relatedness for each assigned group using the Triadic IBD method in COANCESTRY accounting for inbreeding.

[SECTION] dispersal assignment and lone wolves
We identified individuals as dispersers if they met genetic assignment criteria for a pack that resided in a different, disjunct study area from where that individual was sampled. The genetic criteria for dispersers required individuals to exhibit !50% of all pair-wise relatedness values as FS or PO in ML-RELATE or have the majority of their ancestry (q ! 0.5) assigned to a pack (i.e., source pack) in a separate study area (min. distance 63-85 km between study areas depending on year). We evaluated all individuals identified for a given year against all other available genotypes in program STRUCTURE with the same parameters and assumptions as previously described for each study area analysis except we tested K ¼ 1-25. We estimated dispersal distance in ArcGIS version 10 (ESRI, Redlands, CA, USA) from the point of sample collection to the source pack's most recently documented rendezvous site (i.e., Euclidean distance). We identified lone wolves for each study area as individuals whose relationship to sampled packs was unconfirmed, meaning they did not meet spatial or genetic criteria. We calculated the percent of lone wolves per study area by dividing the number of lone wolves by the number of wolves detected in that study area. This lone wolf group will undoubtedly contain adopted individuals or distantly related adults (i.e., offspring from former breeding pairs) because of the restrictions on generating criteria for pack assignment methods.

[SECTION] results
Telemetry-based pack counts averaged 10 individuals (range ¼ 3-19) and 15 out of 17 (88%) packs were reproductively active. On average, reproductively active packs were comprised of 33% pups and 67% adults. One pack, Honey Jones, was previously unknown and not part of initial telemetry efforts. However, after the genetic-based crew discovered it, we trapped and collared an individual and conducted telemetry surveys to obtain a pup and pack count. We surveyed 435 sites in 2009 and 248 sites in 2010 for the NGS-based surveys (Table 1). We collected 1,217 samples in 2009 and 886 samples in 2010. The majority (85%) of all samples were scat collected at rendezvous sites. In each year, 7% of scats were collected as incidentals (i.e., collected opportunistically outside of rendezvous sites) and hair samples comprised 6% in 2009 and 15% in 2010 (Table 1). Success rates in both years for mtDNA species identification  c One male member also counted as a disperser.
ranged from 92-99% for scat and 53-94% for hair. Genotyping success rates (completed min. of 7-9 loci) ranged from 50-80% for scat and 36-72% for hair. Overall, microsatellite analysis produced 1,222 consensus genotypes that resulted in identification of 192 individuals, 13 of which were detected in both 2009 and 2010 (Table 1).

[SECTION] pack assignment
We were able to assign 83% (Table 2) of individuals into 14 discrete packs. Three packs were sampled and identified in both 2009 and 2010 in the Central area; thus, we report and compare to telemetry-based count results for 17 packs (i.e., distinct groups) across both years (Table 2). Successful assignment of individuals to packs ranged from 78% to 97% across study areas with the lowest level of assignment occurring in the 2010 Central dataset and the highest in the North dataset (Table 3). In 2010, we detected a radiocollared wolf from a monitored pack (Nakarna) in the Central area; however, we did not detect the 3 members necessary for pack assignment and were therefore unable to recognize that pack as part of this analysis using our criteria. We successfully detected 1 new pack (i.e., Honey Jones) in 2009 in the Central study area, which was otherwise unknown using telemetry-based methods. Nine individuals (5%) representing potential adoptees were found at active rendezvous sites but did not meet the genetic criteria of the pack occupying that rendezvous site. Because these individuals did not meet the genetic criteria of the pack occupying that rendezvous site, we did not include them in the pack count for this analysis. If these individuals did not Table 3. Minimum counts and population composition of gray wolves in Idaho, USA by year and study area. Included for each study area is the number of wolves identified through noninvasive genetic sampling NGS (N) and a breakdown of assignment results, including the number of individuals assigned to packs (packs-assigned), assigned as dispersers (dispersers-assigned), and classified as loners or unassigned wolves (loners-unconfirmed). A percentage of each count is included to show the proportion of the population belonging to each group. Three individuals were assigned to packs within their study area and also as dispersers, thus percentages do not equal 100 for all areas. meet other criterion, we considered them part of the lone wolf group.

[SECTION] pack characteristics
Assigned packs ranged in size from 3 to 18 and averaged 10 individuals. Packs exhibited an overall sex ratio of 1.0:1.0 (M:F) and variable sex ratios between packs (Table 4). The sex ratio was 1.0:1.0 for adults and 1.2:1.0 for pups. Across all assigned packs, pups comprised 31% and adults comprised 69% of the assigned individuals. For reproductively active packs, pups accounted for 35% of all individuals, leaving adults to make up the majority of pack members (65%). We identified 13 packs (72%) as reproductively active (i.e., !1 pup present), and we inferred both male and female breeders for 8 (62%) of these packs. We inferred 1 breeder for 3 packs and for 2 of those packs we reconstructed the genotype of the second breeder. Only 2 packs exhibited elevated relatedness among inferred breeders, and 1 pack included breeders with a possible half-sibling relationship (r ¼ 0.22). Mean intra-pack relatedness was 0.50 (range ¼ 0.28-0.69; Table 4).

[SECTION] disperser assignment and lone wolves
We assigned 12 individuals as potential dispersers representing 5.9% of the number of sampled individuals (Table 5). This count includes 1 reconstructed genotype (mentioned above) that we inferred based on genetic data originated from the Scott Mountain pack in the West area, dispersed, and ultimately bred with a female wolf from the Moyer Basin pack in the East study area, which resulted in 6 pups (Table 5). Two individuals assigned as dispersers failed to meet criteria for 1 specific source pack because they had relatedness values acceptable for 2 separate source packs. We assigned a probable source pack based on the highest relatedness and ancestry values (Table 5). Estimated minimum distance traveled (from sample location to source pack's most recent rendezvous site) averaged 194 km (range ¼ 127-349 km; Fig. 1). Dispersers exhibited a sex ratio of 2.0:1.0 (M:F). We detected 8 of the 12 dispersers once and 4 individuals >1 time, 2 of which were detected 2 years in a row in the same study area (Table 5). We identified 25 (12%) unconfirmed or lone wolves exhibiting an approximately even sex ratio (13:12).

[SECTION] pre-and post-2009 harvest: central study area
We assigned 4 packs to the Central area each year (Table 2) with 3 packs occurring in both years (i.e., Avery, Fishhook, Honey Jones). The fourth pack was Pettis Peak in 2009 and Marble Mountain in 2010. Pettis Peak did not meet United States Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) criteria to be counted as a pack and, therefore, was not included in annual pack counts by state agencies. However, Pettis Peak has been identified as a documented group in Idaho and we counted them as a pack for this analysis. We detected 34 wolves in 2009 and 37 in 2010 in this study area. We classified 4 packs as reproductively active in 2009 and only 2 in 2010. We classified all re-sampled packs (i.e., Avery, Fishhook, Honey Jones) as reproductively active in 2009 and only Honey Jones in 2010. From 2009 to 2010, the following changes occurred in the re-sampled packs: 1) the Avery pack decreased from 10 to 3 members (all detected in 2009 and 2010), 2) the Fishhook pack increased from 5 to 6 members (although 1 member included in the 2010 count was classified as a loner in 2009), and 3) the Honey Jones pack was consistent with 10 members, 6 of these 10 members were detected in 2009 and 2010 and 3 of those were 1-year-olds or pups-of-the-year from 2009 (Table 4). The average overall sex ratio changed from 1.0:1.0 to 1.1:1.0 (M:F) from 2009 to 2010. The overall mean sex ratio was 1.2:1.0 for adults and 0.6:1.0 for pups in 2009 and 1.0:1.0 for pups in 2010. Pups comprised 29% and 34% of all assigned wolves (i.e., wolves living in packs) in 2009 and 2010, respectively. Pups comprised 32% and Table 5. Potential gray wolf dispersers in Idaho, USA, identified from the dispersal assignment by year. For each individual (wolf ID), the following information is listed: sex, the study area of sample collection (area detected), the resulting dispersal assignments estimated source area and source pack, assignment probability (q-value), number of times detected with noninvasive genetic sampling (no. detections), number of years detected since 2008, and estimated dispersal distance in kilometers based on the source pack's most recent rendezvous site location.

[SECTION] year detected
Wolf

[SECTION] discussion
Many animals live in social groups and delineating these groups can be informative to monitoring, particularly if the species is subject to harvest. Although work has been conducted using similar methods to assign individuals to groups using spatial and genetic data (Caniglia et al. 2014), we provide the first test of these methods against an independent data source. Specifically, we demonstrated that NGS of gray wolf rendezvous sites combined with spatial and genetic pack assignment methods can generate data comparable to telemetry-based methods to determine the number of packs, characterize pack composition and detect dispersing animals and lone wolves while also obtaining valuable pack metrics that provide insight into wolf pack social structure and population dynamics. This survey method has resulted in the detection of 2 new packs (i.e., packs not detected using traditional observational or telemetry-based techniques): 1 during our 2009 sampling (i.e., Honey Jones) and 1 in 2008 (i.e., Casner Creek) under a different study (Stenglein et al. 2010b(Stenglein et al. , 2011) ) but using the same field sampling protocol. Additionally, this field sampling method has been effective in areas without previous knowledge or without data obtained through telemetrybased sources. The resource selection function used to identify the high probability rendezvous sites for surveys described in Ausband et al. (2010) was developed, in part, using data from the East and West study areas. Since that time it has been successfully applied in areas with varying habitat characteristics including northern Idaho (this study; Stansbury et al. 2014) and Alberta, Canada (Ausband 2015). This study provides an example of how NGS can be used as a monitoring method for a heavily managed social carnivore, in addition to providing a basic framework for monitoring other social species.
Our pack assignment method provides a strategy to differentiate and assign pack affiliation and investigate pack characteristics in the absence of telemetry-based or observational data. Using spatial and genetic criteria, we were successful at assigning individuals to packs and the number of individuals per pack was similar to those observed via telemetry-based methods (Table 2), suggesting these noninvasive methods may be a sufficient alternative or supplemental monitoring method for monitoring of social species. As predicted, we were able to detect all packs independently monitored with telemetry. However, we did not always detect the radio-collared individual in each pack. We detected 15 of 22 (68%) radio-collared and monitored wolves, representing 10 of 16 packs (63%) in 2009 and 10 of 13 (77%) monitored wolves, representing 10 of 13 (77%) packs in 2010. Targeting rendezvous sites increased the potential to sample, and in turn genotype, most members of a pack, which provided a highly accurate representation of group composition. First, this enabled us to identify several areas of wolf activity per pack, not only increasing the number of sites to be used in the spatial criteria, but also providing insight into high-and low-use areas. Second, genotyping several pack members is crucial for detecting genetic differentiation within and between packs, which is especially useful when using program STRUCTURE. Last, surveying rendezvous sites may be more efficient and costeffective relative to field sampling strategies used in other assignment methods (Caniglia et al. 2014) that implement large-scale sign surveys requiring substantial volunteer cooperation to cover extensive terrain.
This assignment method enabled us to genetically identify and include pack members sampled outside active rendezvous sites or assumed territory boundaries and exclude unrelated individuals inside territory boundaries that may be inaccurately identified as part of the pack using a spatial criterion alone. Our field strategy of forgoing surveys of predictive rendezvous sites within a 6.4-km buffer from active rendezvous sites likely influenced some of these assignments. Performance of our assignment method would likely increase if we included these nearby sites because we would sample additional rendezvous sites within each pack's territory, which would provide more opportunities to identify locations of common spatial occurrence among pack members. However, this would ultimately decrease the efficiency of this method by increasing the field and laboratory costs. Gray wolf territories fluctuate (Mech andBoitani 2003, Jedrzejewski et al. 2007), and using strict boundary lines to determine pack affiliation of individuals may limit assignments in areas where territories are overlapping or dynamic. By using commonly used locations as our assignment spatial criterion, this method likely provides additional assignments compared to similar studies that use strict territorial boundaries.
Relatedness of individuals within a pack is significantly higher than among members of different packs (Jedrzejewski et al. 2005), providing the basis for our genetic assignment criteria. Using 2 methods to evaluate the genetic criteria (ML-RELATE and STRUCTURE) enabled us to increase the number of individuals included in pack assignments. Most studies caution against using datasets composed of closely related siblings in program STRUCTURE for population assignment (Pritchard et al. 2000, Aspi et al. 2006, Anderson and Dunham 2008). However, this program was ideal to differentiate groups with distinct family lineages for our purpose of identifying fine-scale genetic structure differences in a highly social animal. Similar to population assignments, choosing the appropriate value of K required extensive evaluation and was crucial for appropriate pack assignment. We expected the allele frequency differences between packs would be large enough that K could be representative of the minimum number of packs, but we found this was not always the case. Closely related packs clustered together in STRUCTURE as a result of sharing a recent genealogical lineage (VonHoldt et al. 2010), as is expected from pack splitting or pack budding (Jedrzejewski et al. 2004). To properly assign individuals among these packs, we relied more on ML-RELATE and the spatial criteria (i.e., rendezvous site locations) for final assignment. We found the number of individuals per group often influenced the success of identifying clusters in STRUCTURE; we typically needed !6 individuals from a pack to provide a strong genetic signal for STRUCTURE to identify family groups and differentiate among closely related packs.
As expected, we found evidence that a new breeder (i.e., recent turnover) sometimes disrupted genetic assignment by decreasing pair-wise relatedness of adults and ultimately the overall group assignment. We addressed this with our rule of lumping 2 putative packs as a single pack when they were assigned to the same rendezvous site; thus, our assignment was not negatively affected. This was demonstrated in the Moyer Basin pack where STRUCTURE identified 2 putative packs: 1 comprised of all adults and 1 of all pups. The inferred breeding female was sampled and assigned weakly to the adult group. We did not sample the breeding male but were able to reconstruct the breeding male's genotype. The male's genotype met genetic assignment criteria with both the Moyer Basin pups and the Scott Mountain pack located in a separate study area 131 km away indicating the detection of a gene flow event in our population between our East and West study areas. These assignments are limited by the number of sampled packs and even more so by the number of packs not sampled. Obtaining genetic data for wolf packs between study areas could possibly change some of these assignments. In general, our goal was to determine if an individual originated from a pack nearby or from farther away to assess potential dispersal, as would be suggested by relating more with individuals in a separate study area. However, in this case, we can be confident that the reconstructed genotype was not from the study area in which it was sampled and there is good evidence we detected the source pack given this genotype's high relatedness with an already sampled pack.

[SECTION] pack characteristics
Estimates of pack size are informative for population dynamics (Rausch 1967, Mech andBoitani 2003) and can be used to estimate the number of successful breeding pairs (Mitchell et al. 2008) or inform state-wide estimates of population size using occupancy modeling (Ausband et al. 2014). Pack size counts reported from concurrent telemetry summer monitoring during this study were similar to pack size counts obtained through our pack assignment method (Table 2). Pack size estimates are expected to vary because each method has its limitations, such as the reliance on degraded, low-quality DNA to identify individuals for NGS and sightability constraints for telemetry-based methods. Mean group size is often used in population investigations and we found this metric to be consistent among the 2 methods with 10.4 and 10.0 individuals for the telemetryand NGS-based methods, respectively (Table 2). This result did not support our hypothesis that NGS methods would estimate higher pack counts. However, this is likely a product from having strict genetic criteria to include members as part of the pack, which excludes individuals with low relatedness (e.g., dominated by half-sibling-level relatedness values) or adoptees. Both of these estimates of mean pack size are almost twice as large as seen for wolves in Italy using a similar pack assignment method (Caniglia et al. 2014). Both NGS-and telemetry-based methods detected similar age composition with 31% pups and 69% adults for NGS and 33% pups and 67% adults for telemetry methods. By sampling rendezvous sites, we likely eliminated sex-specific sampling bias in pup samples. Age structure data for packs is extremely hard to obtain. Our NGS method can provide age estimates for animals first sampled as pups and with repeated annual sampling (with pups detected each year) and does not require capture or mortality to obtain such information. Investigating pack characteristics beyond size and age is limited in telemetry-based methods; however, NGS-based methods provide the opportunity to assess additional pack characteristics. We detected an overall even ratio among adult males and females across study areas; however, some packs exhibited a slight male bias (Table 4). This could be related to dispersal differences because we detected twice as many male dispersal events as female dispersals. Caniglia et al. (2014) detected 236 males and 178 females across 9 years of surveys; however, their extensive sign-survey method was likely to include more dispersing and lone individuals compared to our rendezvous site-focused approach. The degree of exploitation in a wolf population may drive sex ratios in wolf litters (Mech 1975). For example, low-density populations may produce femalebiased litters as an adaptive strategy because daughters have been known to take the breeding position in natal packs, whereas male migrants are often adopted into the pack as a new breeder (Jedrzejewski et al. 2005, Sidorovich et al. 2007, VonHoldt et al. 2008).
Targeting rendezvous sites allowed us to successfully investigate contemporary reproduction, a valuable component of population monitoring, in particular for gray wolves in the United States where estimating recruitment is a standard monitoring criterion. Furthermore, rendezvous site sampling may provide better estimates of pack size by including the current year's litters and breeders. In all but the Jureano Mountain pack, we were able to identify !1 breeder. In a system composed of social groups of highly related individuals (i.e., packs), we expect most pair-wise relatedness among individuals to be at the level of parent-offspring or full-siblings, with the exception of the breeding pair (Jedrzejewski et al. 2005). Because of the necessary genetic criteria for assigning individuals to packs, our reported intrapack relatedness may be high compared to other studies. Jedrzejewski et al. (2005) reported mean intra-pack relatedness at 0.23 for a heavily exploited population, which is below most of our packs (range ¼ 0.28-0.69). The highest intra-pack relatedness in our study was in the Jureano Mountain (r ¼ 0.68) and Pettis Peak packs (r ¼ 0.69). These elevated levels could be caused by a number of factors including high exploitation causing frequent breeder turnover, potentially resulting in inbreeding if migrants are not available to replace breeders (VonHoldt et al. 2008, Stenglein et al. 2011). Stenglein et al. (2011) detected inbreeding and 2 litters in the summer of 2008 in the Jureano Mountain pack. Alternatively, low levels of relatedness have also been seen in exploited packs (Rutledge et al. 2010). Unfortunately, disentangling differences in relatedness among packs is beyond the scope of this study.
Our pack assignment method was not designed to detect adoptees in a single year of sampling. Several studies have reported unrelated non-breeders present in wolf packs (Lehman et al. 1992, Grewel et al. 2004, Jedrzejewski et al. 2005); however, the prevalence of these adoptees is largely unknown and undoubtedly varies among packs and populations. We sampled 9 individuals at 6 active rendezvous sites (representing 35% of packs with potential adoptees) that did not meet genetic criteria and therefore were not assigned to the pack occupying the site. These individuals are likely less related pack members that did not meet genetic criteria or are true adoptees and were accepted as members by the pack. However, without multiple years of sampling or additional data we cannot exclude the possibility that these individuals may have simply traveled through these rendezvous sites before or after they were occupied by the resident pack during pup-rearing season. Disentangling these hypotheses would require multiple sampling events within a year or multi-year NGS monitoring.

[SECTION] identifying dispersers and lone wolves
Developing an assignment method that distinguished dispersers versus lone individuals was difficult primarily because of variation in an individual's relatedness to neighboring packs, and lack of genetic data for packs between study areas and in neighboring states. We assigned individuals for which we were unable to assign to a pack during pack assignment as loners or dispersers, based on whether or not we were able to identify a closely related pack or potential source pack, given the available data. We detected 12 potential dispersers using our dispersal criteria and documented a gene flow event between study areas through genotype reconstruction of a male breeder. As hypothesized, each study area exhibited evidence of movement between at least 1 other study area (Fig. 1). These dispersers comprised 6% of the sampled population. We observed dispersal distances (127-349 km) greater than those reported by Boyd and Pletscher (1999) for wolves in this region (M: 113 km and F: 78 km), but our range of distances was not unusual for gray wolves (Mech and Boitani 2003). Genetic detection of dispersers is important for population monitoring and identifying successful migrants enables us to detect gene flow, a required component of delisting criteria (VonHoldt et al. 2010). We estimated lone wolves to comprise 12% of the population. This is comparable to telemetry-based estimates of lone wolves in Idaho, which are estimated at 9% of the population count (Stenglein et al. 2010b). All study areas had lone wolves except the North area where we assigned all individuals as pack members or dispersers. Our method likely produces an overestimate of lone wolves because it includes all individuals that did not meet our specific pack assignment criteria and were assigned, by default, to the lone wolf category. These individuals may be true lone wolves, active members of identified packs that did not meet our criteria, members of packs where we failed to identify a sufficient number of individuals to meet pack assignment requirements (i.e., !3), or members of packs not sampled during this study.

[SECTION] pre-and post-2009 harvest: central study area
Noninvasive genetic sampling at wolf rendezvous sites can be an efficient monitoring strategy for harvested populations and enables managers to evaluate pack metrics that provide important information about pack and population stability. Multiple years of monitoring provides the opportunity to evaluate changes in pack characteristics important in assessing population and pack health, including recruitment (Ausband et al. 2015), changes in pack size, reproductive activity, breeder turnover, new and recaptured individuals, age ratio, sex ratio, and overall relatedness of groups.
Loss of 1 or both breeders may cause disruption or termination of social groups, decreased pup survival, territory abandonment, or reduced pack size (Brainerd et al. 2008), all of which ultimately influence population-level dynamics. In the Central area, we had the opportunity to evaluate pack metrics before ( 2009) and after the first hunting season (2010). We detected a slight increase in the minimum count of individuals in the Central area. This increase was likely due to differences in pack detection because we detected the larger Marble Mountain pack in 2010 only and the smaller Pettis Peak in 2009 only (Table 4). Of the 34 wolves detected in 2009, 13 (38%) were redetected in 2010. No members of Pettis Peak were detected in the 2010 NGS surveys or through telemetry-based monitoring efforts (Holyan et al. 2011), suggesting they did not survive the harvest, the pack disbanded, or the pack moved from its former territory. Holyan et al. (2011) considered the Fishhook pack as no longer extant in 2010 because !4 members were harvested and no telemetry-based evidence was found indicating pack survival. However, our pack assignment placed 6 individuals in the Fishhook pack, 2 of which were recaptures from 2009, suggesting the Fishhook pack survived the first Idaho wolf harvest. Additionally, wildlife managers have documented the Fishhook pack in subsequent years.
Litter size has been reported to increase in exploited populations (Rausch 1967) compared to unexploited populations (Pimlott et al. 1969). We compared litter size in 2009 and 2010 and found no substantial differences, but our sample sizes are small and we have only 1 year of monitoring in 1 area post-harvest. However, we did see a change in age composition within packs with pups increasing from comprising 32% of all individuals in 2009 to 50% in 2010. We detected a decrease in mean intra-pack relatedness from 2009 to 2010, which has been previously reported in exploited populations (Rutledge et al. 2010). We found an increase of the number of unrelated wolves (2009 ¼ 0 and 2010 ¼ 4) present at rendezvous sites. This is consistent with earlier studies that detected more unrelated individuals or adoptees in exploited packs, suggesting exploited packs may be more tolerant to adopting unrelated individuals (Jedrzejewski et al. 2005, Rutledge et al. 2010).

[SECTION] management implications
Our NGS field sampling strategy combined with our pack assignment method provides an effective strategy to identify functional groups in social species and obtain group metrics important for population monitoring. For species subject to harvest, pack assignment can be highly informative in evaluating the impact of harvest on group dynamics and subsequently the population. If implemented annually, this method, in combination with genetic analysis of harvested samples, could provide an estimate of breeding pairs and survival rates of adults and pups. In addition, dispersal and reproduction events can be detected providing genetic data critical to assessing the population connectivity goals of the recovery program (USFWS 1987(USFWS , 1994)). Noninvasive genetic sampling at predicted rendezvous sites can be easily integrated into current monitoring efforts. Integrating this and other alternative methods into monitoring is best done gradually to minimize data loss and provide sufficient time to optimize techniques. This NGS monitoring method is effective in areas where no existing data have been acquired and where current monitoring efforts already exist. Plus, the overall performance is improved with every additional year of sampling (see online Supporting Information for comparison) to track individuals and packs, estimate survival, evaluate dispersal, identify adoptees, and monitor pack and population dynamics.
====================================================================================================
FILE: A non-invasive faecal survey for the study of spatial ecology and kinship of solitary felids in the .grobid.tei (1).xml
====================================================================================================

[SECTION] title
A non-invasive faecal survey for the study of spatial ecology and kinship of solitary felids in the Virua National Park, Amazon Basin

[SECTION] abstract
Jaguars and pumas are the largest felids in the Americas. Information about these two species is scarce, especially where both species are sympatric. We studied the use and selection of macrohabitats, spatial segregation and kinship in jaguars and pumas in the Viruá National Park (Amazonian lowlands) by non-invasive genetic analyses of faecal samples. Seven different jaguars (six males and one female) and nine different pumas (five males and four females) were identified. We found space use segregation between the two species, with pumas using mostly forested habitats and jaguars using open habitats slightly more than the forested ones. This result is unexpected since previous studies have found that pumas favour more open habitats than jaguars. The results suggest that jaguars use the areas in a more random manner, corresponding to the habits of a dominant generalist species, whereas pumas use the area to reduce encounter rates with jaguars. Nevertheless, both species mainly used areas near upland forestflooding habitats. Some kinship categories were supported with a p<0.05 in 57% and 83% of the pair comparisons between the identified jaguars and identified pumas, respectively. Non-invasive genetic analysis of faeces was useful to study the spatial ecology of solitary, rare and cryptic species in the Amazon.

[SECTION] introduction
Jaguars (Panthera onca) and pumas (Puma concolor) are the largest felids in the Americas. The species coexist throughout the jaguar's distribution area, basically in the Neotropics, and share a similar life history and behavioural traits (Sunquist and Sunquist 2002). Although jaguars and pumas are respectively listed by IUCN as Near Threatened and of Least Concern, and in CITES Appendix I and II, in many areas of their distribution range are of conservation concern (Caso et al. 2008;Nielsen et al. 2015). Some of their populations have been extirpated, are at high risk of extirpation, or are declining due to loss of habitat quality and fragmentation, poaching of their main prey and retaliatory killing due to livestock depredation (Nowell and Jackson 1996;Zanin et al. 2015;Petracca et al. 2014). This situation is particularly accentuated for the jaguar, which has lost more than 50% of its former distribution area (Sanderson et al. 2002). Much of the jaguar's remaining habitat is the rainforest of the Amazon Basin (88% of its remaining area of occupancy; Caso et al. 2008), which is also considered of relatively low suitability (Torres et al. 2007). Despite the importance of the Amazon Basin for jaguars, little information exists on the ecology of the species in that region and in the rest of Latin America, which is also true for pumas (Haines 2006;Caso et al. 2008;Laundré & Hernández 2010;Nielsen et al. 2015;Palomares et al. 2016). The only published information for the Amazon Basin relates to jaguar density estimations by camera-trapping in the Colombian, Bolivian and Peruvian Amazon (Silver et al. 2004;Payan 2008;Tobler et al. 2013).
In this paper, we provide information on jaguar and puma spatial ecology and some population parameters of both felids in the Viruá National Park (northern Brazilian Amazon Basin) by non-invasive genetic analyses of faeces that is an increasingly efficient method for studying the use and selection of macrohabitats, and relationships among individuals in secretive mammals. Furthermore, we examined whether there was any spatial segregation between the species, as would be expected due to their ecologically similar requirements (Sunquist & Sunquist 2002;Haines 2006;Caso et al. 2008;Nielsen et al. 2015).

[SECTION] study area
The study was conducted in Viruá National Park (Caracaraí municipality, Roraima state, Brazil; 1º29'9'' N, 61º2'10'' W; 227.000 ha; Fig. 1), which is limited by the Branco River to the west, a national road to the northeast, an abandoned dirt road to the east and the Anauá River to the south. The climate is wet tropical, with a rainy period and a marked dry period from November to March (Marengo et al. 2001). The mean daily temperature and annual rainfall during the study years were 27ºC and 2300 mm, respectively. The vegetation is characterised by mosaics formed by transitions between savannahs and tropical upland forests, with the former being frequently flooded in some months of the year (Machado et al. 2004).
The area has a sampling infrastructure that includes a trail system forming a 5x5 km grid (Magnusson et al. 2005). A description of the trail system and infrastructure can be obtained from the Program for Biodiversity Research (PPBio) website <http://ppbio.inpa.gov.br>. The grid consists of six parallel 5-km trails and six 5-km trails perpendicular to those, totalling 60 km.

[SECTION] sample collection and preservation
Faecal sampling was carried out during the end of the dry season (February-March) in 2008, 2009and 2011, by slowly walking along the trails of the 5x5 km grid system, the access trails to the park headquarters, and the 56 km of the abandoned dirt road to the east. Additionally, in 2011, several cross-country transects were walked along the river border in the confluence area of the Branco and Anauá Rivers to the south of the Park. In total, we walked 261 km on dirt roads and trails. In 2009 and 2011, some faeces were collected with the help of a scat detector dog (Smith et al. 2001).
The samples were stored in 200-ml plastic containers with silica gel and their location geo-referenced using a GPS. A few samples in 2008 were not georeferenced.
Type of macrohabitat (upland forest, campinarana and campina; see below) and height of the vegetation in a circle of 25 m diameter around the faecal position were also recorded during the 2011 sampling.

[SECTION] dna extraction for species, sex and individual identification
DNA extraction of faecal samples was conducted according to protocols based on the GuSCN⁄silica method (Boom et al. 1990;Höss & Pääbo, 1993;Frantz et al. 2003). Each batch of extractions (n = 15) included one PCR negative extraction control to monitor for contamination by exogenous DNA. DNA extractions of faecal samples were performed in a UV-sterilized laminar flow hood in an isolated laboratory specially designated for the manipulation of non-invasive material.
Faecal samples were screened for species identity using species-specific primers as described in Roques et al. (2011). The method consists of a single-tube multiplex PCR yielding species-specific banding patterns on agarose gel, allowing the unambiguous identification of jaguars and pumas among other felid species. For sex identification, we used the method described by Pilgrim et al. (2005), based on the difference in size between the PCR products amplified from the male Y-chromosome copy (AMELY) and the X-chromosome gene (AMELX), optimised for faecal samples from Neotropical felid species such as jaguar, puma, ocelot and margay, as described by Palomares et al. (2012).
Individual genotyping for jaguars and pumas was conducted using an optimised set of 11 (Fca024, Fca026, Fca043, Fca077, Fca082b, Fca090, F115a, Fca126, Fca176, Fca547b, Fca566b;Menotti-Raymond et al. 1999) and12 (Fca077, Fca82b, Fca126, Fca547b, PcoB003w, PcoB010w, PcoA208w, PcoB210w, PcoA216w, PcoC108w, PcoC112w andPcoA339w, Menotti-Raymond et al. 1999;Kurushima et al. 2006) microsatellite markers, respectively (Palomares et al. 2012;Roques et al. 2014;Zanin et al. 2016). Before genotyping the whole set of microsatellites, DNA extracts were evaluated for quality by direct amplification of the Fca82b locus, which was selected for its high amplification robustness. The samples that failed to amplify this locus would probably not amplify the remaining loci and were not genotyped.
A two-step strategy was used to improve genotyping success rate and accuracy through two sequential amplifications (Bellemain & Taberlet 2004;Piggott et al. 2004): a multiplex PCR that included the whole set of primer pairs and a reduced number of cycles (pre-PCR) at a moderate annealing temperature, followed by the amplification of each locus separately, using the PCR products as templates (post-PCR). Pre-PCR was performed in a multiplex reaction with 7 μL of DNA extract in a 30 μL reaction including 67 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 16mM (NH 4 ) 2 SO 4 , 1.5 mM MgCl 2 , 0.8 µM dNTPs, 0.8 mg/ml BSA, 0.02 or 0.03 μM each primer, and 0.6 U of Taq DNA polymerase (Bioline). Pre-PCR conditions were as follows: initial denaturation at 94 °C for 2 min, 25 cycles of 30s at 92 ºC, 55 ºC and 72 ºC and a final extension of 5 min at 72 °C.
Second-stage post-PCR amplifications were performed independently for each marker using 4 μl of PCR product in a final volume of 20 μl reactions containing 67 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 16mM (NH 4 ) 2 SO 4 , 2mM MgCl 2 , 0.25mM dNTPs, 0.8 mg/ml BSA, 0.2 μM of each primer and 0.5 U of Taq polimerase. Post-PCR conditions were: initial denaturation at 94 °C for 2 min, 40 cycles of 30s at 92 ºC, specific annealing temperature (see Roques et al. 2014;Zanin et al. 2016) and 72 ºC and a final extension of 5 min at 72 °C. Up to 6 PCR products of jaguar samples from the second amplification step, with fluorescently labelled primers, or 12 PCR products in the case of puma samples, were combined on an ABI PRISM 3130 XL Genetic Analyzer.
Alleles were sized using GeneMapper Software version 3.7 (Applied Biosystems).
Samples were genotyped using a multi-tube approach (Navidi et al 1992;Taberlet et al 1996Taberlet et al , 1999;;Taberlet & Luikart, 1999;Goossens et al. 2000) with four replicates per locus per individual. For a locus to be considered homozygous, only the same allele could be observed in at least three independent replicates, without observing an additional allele in the fourth replicate. The heterozygous loci were those with the same two different alleles in at least two replicates. A quality index (QI) similar to the one described by Miquel et al. (2006) was calculated for each sample, referred to individual alleles instead of the genotype of a given locus. We calculated the percentage of replicates that were equal to the consensus for each given allele, and then we averaged the values across individuals and loci. Samples with QI below 0.5 or with less than seven loci genotyped were discarded from further analyses.
All molecular analyses were carried out in the Laboratory of Molecular Ecology of the Doñana Biological Station (Seville, Spain).

[SECTION] spatial segregation
We tested for spatial overlap between jaguars and pumas with a null model (Gotelli and Graves 1996), which randomised the spatial distributions of jaguar and puma samples.
Given the apparent stability of jaguar and puma detection over time (see Fig. 1), we pooled the data from all years. For the randomisation process, we first assigned each faecal sample to a 1 km 2 cell, and then computed the observed spatial overlap between the species (i.e., number of 1 km 2 cells with detection of both species in relation to the total number of cells with detections). In a second step, we built the randomisation procedure based on the mean percentage of overlapping jaguar and puma occurrence cells, to test whether the puma or jaguar cells were distributed randomly relative to the other species' cells. At each step of the process, we randomly distributed the samples of each species over the total number of occurrence cells containing any sample, and computed the percentage again. We repeated this process 1000 times and then compared the observed percentages with the distribution of simulated percentages, to compute a pvalue. This algorithm was built in R software, and it is available on request.

[SECTION] macrohabitat selection
Macrohabitats were determined directly in the field only for a few samples and for all samples with GPS location using ArcGIS®. Three different types of For macrohabitat characterisation using ArcGIS® we used a detailed landcover map elaborated for the management plan of Viruá National Park and surrounding areas (ICMBio 2014), with a resolution of 1m 2 grid cells. Nine different landcover types are defined in the map, which were re-classified in the three macrohabitats described above (upland forest, campina and campinarana; Supporting Information Table S1). Since there were few samples for the flooding macrohabitats, for analyses we only considered two general types of macrohabitat: upland forest and flooding habitats (comprising campina and campinarana).
Differences between jaguars and pumas in the number of scats located within each macrohabitat were examined by a chi-square test. We counted the number of scats in each type of macrohabitat and related it to their availability in the study area using the Jacobs index (Jacobs, 1974), which varies from +1 for maximum preference to-1 for maximum avoidance. Availability of macrohabitats was measured within the minimum convex polygon traced around all the scat samples collected. From the actual location of scat samples of jaguars and pumas (Fig. 1), we examined the relationship between the probability of finding a scat from a jaguar or puma and the distance to the upland forestflooding habitat edge using a logistic regression. The logistic regression was conducted in R software with the "stats" package.

[SECTION] relatedness and categories of relationship among individuals
We calculated maximum likelihood estimates of relatedness and relationship (see Blouin 2003 for definitions) between dyads of jaguars and dyads of pumas with the program ML-Relate (Kalinowski et al. 2006) for all the different individuals identified in the study area. This program uses microsatellite data and can accommodate null alleles. Thus, we determined the probability (p<0.05) among four common categories of relationships between individuals of each species (i.e., parent-offspring, full-sibs, halfsibs, and unrelated), and the index r of relatedness between each dyad using 999 simulated genotypes.
Relationship categories and relatedness are more confidently estimated when allele frequencies of the population are well sampled, so to calculate allele frequencies we used a total of 24 genotypes of jaguars and 20 genotypes of pumas from the Amazon Basin that we had in our data bases from samples of both species. Both jaguars and pumas from the Amazon Basin (including those of the Virua area) belong to the same genetic populations, respectively (Roques et al. 2016; authors unpublished), thus, the inclusion of these samples increased robustness of analyses. These genotypes were obtained using the same molecular techniques previously described and in the same laboratory, and were collected between 2005 and 2011 in a total of four study areas in the Amazon basin (see Roques et al. 2016 for a description of the study areas).

[SECTION] scat analyses
We collected 175 scats, of which 51.4% were identified: 25 from jaguars and 35 from pumas. Overall, we collected 0.10 and 0.13 jaguar and puma scats/km, respectively. Eighty four percent of jaguar scats and 55% of puma scats were from males. The number of samples genotyped after positive amplification of the Fca82b locus were 19 for jaguars and 29 for pumas. Ten out of 11 microsatellite loci used for jaguars had an amplification success higher than 77%, except one (locus Fca176) with 48% success. For pumas, three microsatellite markers (locus PcoB3, locus Fca82, and locus Fca547) had an amplification success of 66-67%, and the nine remaining between 71-94%. The probability of identity estimated for the 11 and 12 analysed loci indicated that our microsatellite panel was sufficient to discriminate individuals within the entire dataset (P (ID)sib = 4.23 x 10 -5 , and 1.01 x 10 -4 , for jaguars and pumas, respectively).
Fourteen jaguar genotypes and 26 puma genotypes obtained a QI value greater than 0.5 and reached more than 7 loci genotyped, thus, meeting our quality requirements. Seven different jaguars (six males and one female) and nine different pumas (five males and four females) were identified using these high quality genotypes, with a mean number of 2.0 (SE= 0.49, range=1-4) and 2.8 (SE= 1.92, range= 1-9) scats collected per individual for jaguars and pumas, respectively. Only one male jaguar was resampled in 2009 and 2011, and only one female puma was resampled in all surveyed years (Fig. 1).

[SECTION] spatial distribution and macrohabitat selection
We recorded the location of 56 scats (21 of jaguar and 35 of puma; four scats were not georeferenced), which were distributed within 32 1 km 2 cells, of which 12.5% contained samples of both species. The null model clearly showed that both species segregated in space more than expected by random (simulated percentage of simultaneous occurrence was 31.3%, significantly higher than the 12.5% observed with a p<0.001).
Eighty-six percent of jaguar faeces (n=21) were found in flooding habitats, whereas only 11% of puma scats (n=35) were found in this type of vegetation (Table 1; Fig. 1; χ 2 = 27.3, df = 1, p<0.001). Data obtained directly in the field during sampling, greatly coincided with map-derived data (Table 1). The height of the vegetation canopy was 2-12 m for flooding habitats and 15-25 m for upland forests. Comparing the use with the availability of these macrohabitats, pumas clearly avoided flooding areas (Jacobs index= -0.94) and selected upland forests (Jacobs index= 0.94), whereas jaguars seemed to use close to available the two types of macrohabitats (Jacobs indexes = 0.17 and -0.16, respectively; Table 1). The logistic regression showed that the probability of a scat belonging to a jaguar or puma increased with distance from the forest edge (jaguar to flooding habitats and puma to upland forest interior; p<0.001). Nevertheless, both species preferred to be near the edge (86% and 89% jaguar and puma detections, respectively, < 1 km from the edge; Figs. 1 and2).

[SECTION] relatedness and categories of relationship among individuals
Some level of relatedness was supported under a p<0.05 in 57.1% of the 21pair comparisons between the seven identified jaguars (Supplementary Information Table S2). However, all of them also included "unrelated" as a possibility, and in only one case (JVIRH1-JVIRM6) a half-sib relationship was clearly ranked first (Supplementary Information Table S2) according to its maximum likelihood estimate. On the other hand, 83.3% out of the 36 pair comparisons in pumas may be from related individuals according to a p<0.05, although in only 8.3% (three cases) the lack of relatedness was totally discarded (Supplementary Information Table S2). According to the maximum likelihood estimates, the parent-offspring relationships between PVIRH1-PVIRH4 and PVIRH3-PVIRH4, and full sibs between PVIRM2-PVIRH4 and PVIRM6-PVIRM5 were ranked as the most probable (Supplementary Information Table S2).
Differences in percentage of pairs with a possible relationship between jaguars and pumas approached significance (Z= 1.854, p= 0.064; Z test), and the number of pair comparisons with higher values of the maximum likelihood estimates of relatedness (i.e., a closer relationship) was clearly higher in pumas than in jaguars (Supplementary Information Table S2). This result did not seem to be biased due to the fact that we detected mainly males in jaguars, and a similar number of both sexes in pumas.
Considering only comparisons between males, percentages of pairs with a possible relationship was 46.7% and 90.0%, for jaguars and pumas, respectively (Z= 1.771, p= 0.077). However, the indices of relatedness were often higher for pair comparisons involving a female (Supplementary Information Table S2), although the few available samples prevented statistical testing of this trend.

[SECTION] discussion
Both jaguars and pumas are considered as habitat generalists, found from arid areas to rain forests. In sympatric areas, the species can be found in the same areas and macrohabitats (Núñez et al. 2002;Scognamillo et al. 2003;Noss et al. 2006, Estrada Hernández 2008;Monroy-Vilchis et al. 2009;Harmsen et al. 2009, Di Bitetti et al. 2010;Palomares et al. 2016). In a few cases, very small differences in macrohabitat use were recorded within local scale studies (Schaller & Crawshaw 1980;Emmons 1987;Chávez 2010;Sollman et al. 2012), which pointed to pumas favouring more open habitats, although also using forest areas, and jaguars using both open and forested habitats in proportion to availability (Farrell and Sunquist 2000;Scognamillo et al. 2003;Silveira 2004). Pumas have also been described as more tolerant to humaninfluenced landscapes than jaguars (De Angelo et al. 2011;Sollman et al. 2012; but also see Foster et al. (2010) for a contrary result).
We found an apparently clear segregation in space use between the species, as well as a differential use of macrohabitats, with pumas mostly using the forested habitats and jaguars slightly favouring the open areas. The latter result is unexpected, since previous studies have found the pumas favour more open habitats than jaguars. The reasons for this discrepancy are not clear, but might be related to food availability and competition interactions between the species. We believe that the low sample size obtained for the two species or the sampling procedure to collect faecal samples did not affect this result, because the sampling procedure and effort was identical for both species, and the statistical analyses clearly confirmed the observed spatial patterns.
Under a potential competition scenario, jaguars should be dominant over pumas (Ruth & Murphy, 2010;Oliveira & Pereira, 2014), and if so, both theoretical and empirical studies predict that pumas should avoid habitats or areas used by jaguars to decrease the risk of interspecific encounters (Case and Gilpin 1974;Palomares andCaro 1999, Linnell andStrand 2000). The threat of aggression can create a 'landscape of fear' (Laundré, Hernández & Altendorf 2001) that excludes prey or subordinate species from suitable habitats, normally in core areas of the dominant species (e.g. Palomares et al. 1996;Swanson et al. 2014). This was partially the case in our study, as both species segregated in the use of space, and pumas mainly selected upland forests and avoided flooding habitats, but jaguars did not avoid upland forests. Therefore, our results suggest that jaguars use the study area in a more random manner, probably triggered by prey availability, as would be expected from a dominant generalist species. Pumas behave spatially in a way to diminish encounter rates with jaguars, preferring forest areas, where visibility is lower and escape possibilities higher if a jaguar is close. In a larger scale study, Palomares et al. (2016) found microhabitat segregation between jaguars and pumas, which was explained well by a scenario of interference competition between the two species with pumas being subordinate. Furthermore, both species mainly used areas close to upland forest-flooding habitat transitions, where prey-species richness is expected to be higher (Schluter & Ricklefs 1993;Brown 1995).
Most solitary carnivore species exhibit female philopatry and male-biased dispersal (Logan & Sweanor 2001;Støen et al. 2005). Our results seem to support this, since relatedness was higher when females were included. Nevertheless, our data did not allow for testing this hypothesis. In other studies with pumas, contrasting results have been found. Biek et al. (2006) and Miotto et al. (2012) found that females were closer related among them than males with other males, while Onorato et al. (2011) found that males were closer related among them than females with other females.
Our data showed that pumas presented higher levels of relatedness than jaguars. Three non-exclusive facts might explain these differences: 1) Puma home ranges may be smaller than jaguar home ranges in Viruá. If puma home ranges are smaller, and accepting female philopatry, the number of potentially related individuals in pumas would be higher than in jaguars. There is no information on home range size for jaguars or pumas in the Amazon Basin, but in the savannah habitat of Emas National Park, where both species have been radio-tracked, pumas had home ranges of 124-763 km 2 , and jaguars of 401-1102 km 2 (Silveira 2004). 2) Jaguars might have higher mortality rates than pumas in the area, promoting a higher exchange of unrelated individuals in the population. Jaguars are usually more persecuted by retaliatory hunting due to livestock depredation than pumas (e.g. Conforti & Cascelli de Azevedo 2003;Michalski et al. 2006). 3) Differential reproductive parameters might allow, for a given time period, for more related individuals of pumas than jaguars to be present in the area. For example, litter size is usually larger in pumas than in jaguars (Shaw 2010;Desbiez et al. 2012).
Our results show that non-invasive faecal surveys of solitary and elusive felids may be a suitable methodology to provide information on space use and spatial relationships between species, in addition to several genetic population parameters (see Roques et al. 2016).
Table 1 Macrohabitats where jaguar and puma faeces were found according to data directly gathered during fieldwork and from vegetation maps of Viruá National Park.
For data recorded during fieldwork, height of the vegetation is also shown.

