[SECTION] title
Assessment of DNA damage in sperm after repeated non-invasive sampling in zebrafish Danio rerio

[SECTION] abstract
Repeated non-invasive sampling of zebrafish Danio rerio sperm was conducted, sperm counts were obtained and a method for measurement of DNA damage in sperm was developed and validated (single-cell gel electrophoresis, comet, assay). DNA damage in sperm increased with concentration of hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 , 0-200 μM), and in vitro exposure of sperm to 200 μM H 2 O 2 produced 88•7 ± 3•9% tail DNA compared to unexposed controls [12 ± 0•7% tail DNA (mean ± s.e., n = 3)]. Frequency of sperm sampling (sampled every 2, 4 or 7 days) did not affect DNA damage in sperm, but sperm counts decreased 57 and 22% for fish sampled every 2 or 4 days, respectively.

[SECTION] (no title)
Sperm quality is an important aspect of reproductive fitness and an indication of the integrity of male reproductive system physiology. Spermatozoa have been reported to be more important than ova regarding the potential to transmit DNA damage to the next generation (Lewis & Aitken, 2005), due in part because of the presence of damage repair systems in oocytes (Ashwood-Smith & Edwards, 1996) that are largely absent in sperm (Leal et al ., 2009). Although zebrafish Danio rerio (Hamilton 1822) are a prominent model organism and sperm can be sampled from D. rerio (Jing et al ., 2009), assessment of sperm is seldom included in D. rerio research projects. Measurement of DNA damage in D. rerio sperm by the comet (single-cell gel electrophoresis) assay has been conducted, but the method has been applied only to excised testes after euthanasia (Bony et al ., 2010;Uren-Webster et al ., 2010). Validating assessment of genotoxicity in sublethally extracted sperm and assessing §Author to whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel.: +44 1752 232 940; email: Ted.Henry@ plymouth.ac.uk #Present address: Bermuda Institute for Ocean Sciences, 17 Ferry Reach, St. George's, GE 01, Bermuda. effects of repeated sampling can reduce numbers of experimental animals, a key aim in animal research (Buchanan-Smith et al ., 2005). The objective of this study was to develop and validate methods for evaluation of DNA damage in sperm cells using the comet assay (Jha, 2008), and to evaluate the effect of the frequency of non-invasive sperm sampling on sperm number and presence of DNA damage in sperm.
Typically, D. rerio spawn at the beginning of the photoperiod (Lawrence, 2007), and, in this experiment, sperm from adult male fish (age c. 120 days, maintained under routine approved animal welfare protocols) were sampled within 1 h of the start of the photoperiod. Fish were lightly anaesthetized with MS-222 and held within a 1 cm deep groove cut in a sponge to enable access to the ventral surface and facilitate sperm collection during examination by stereomicroscope. Slight abdominal finger pressure was applied and expelled sperm was collected in a hand-pulled glass capillary tube (Na-hep micro-haematocrit tubes, diameter 1•55 ± 0•05 mm, Fisher Scientific; www.fisher.co.uk), following the method of Wilson-Leedy & Ingermann (2007). Sperm collected in the tube was expelled onto a glass microscope slide that was kept on ice (to reduce evaporation from sperm sample drop). The mean volume of the sperm sample obtained was 2 μl (range 1-5 μl), and was consistent with other studies (Xu et al ., 2008). A 0•5 or 1•0 μl (depending on volume obtained from fish) aliquot of the sperm sample was pipetted from the glass slide into a tube and stored on ice for analysis within 6 h. Fish were allowed to recover in fresh water before they were returned to the system aquaria. The whole sampling process from anaesthesia to recovery took <5 min, and fish were held out of water for <1•5 min.
Validation of the comet assay in D. rerio sperm was conducted in three separate experiments. Sperm samples were exposed in vitro to hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ); unless otherwise specified, all chemicals were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (Sigma-Aldrich Company Ltd; www.sigmaaldrich.com). Sperm samples (total volume collected) from three male fish were pooled, diluted in 100 μl Hank's buffered saline solution (HBSS) and triplicate aliquots of the sperm dilution were incubated at the following final H 2 O 2 concentrations: 0, 10, 25, 50, 100 and 200 μM [range selected on sensitivity of aquatic organisms (Cheung et al ., 2006)]. After 10 min incubation, cells were centrifuged (8000 g, 4 min) into a pellet, H 2 O 2 was removed and the cells were re-suspended in 10 μl HBSS to be processed for the comet assay.
The comet assay was adapted from a protocol developed for human sperm (Simon et al ., 2010). In brief, sperm cells (10 μl) were mixed with 180 μl low melting point agarose (0•5% agarose), pipetted onto a slide precoated with 1•5% normal melting point agarose (dried overnight) and covered with a glass cover slip. Gels were allowed to set for 1 h in a cold room (5 • C) before cover slips were removed, and slides were placed in lysis solution (2•5 M NaCl, 100 mM EDTA, 10 mM Tris and 1% Triton X-100, pH 10) for 1 h. The present procedure differed from that of Simon et al . (2010) in that decondensation steps were not used because they caused increased damage in control D. rerio sperm. After lysis, slides were placed in electrophoresis buffer (300 mM NaOH and 1 mM EDTA, pH 13) for 20 min (to unwind DNA), followed by electrophoresis (25 V, 280-350 mA) for 20 min. Slides were washed in neutralization buffer (0•4 M Tris-HCl, pH 7•5) and distilled water, allowed to dry overnight and scored for % tail DNA (100 cells per slide, Komet 5, Kinetic Imaging, Andor Technology; www.andor.com) following routine procedures (Collins, 2004). The effect of sampling frequency on DNA damage and sperm counts was investigated in experimental fish stocked into nine 10 l glass aquaria supplied with partial (10% exchange per day) recirculating water. Each aquarium was divided in half with a mesh and six reproductively active females (demonstrated by previous pair spawning producing >50 viable embryos) were placed on one side of the mesh. Three reproductively active male fish (mean ± s.e. total length, L T = 33•8 ± 0•3 mm, n = 27 fish) were placed into each tank on the opposite side of the mesh from females. Male fish were individually identifiable by their size within each aquarium and were allowed to acclimate to the aquarium for 7 days. The frequency of sperm sampling was the test variable with three tanks per treatment: fish were sampled every 2, 4 or 7 days (n = 3 tanks and n = 9 males per treatment). Fish in the twoday treatment were sampled (as described above) every other day for 14 days, the four-day treatment group were sampled on days 0, 4, 8 and 12 and the seven day treatment group were sampled on days 0, 7 and 14.
For sperm cell counts, a haemocytometer (Neubauer; www.marienfeldsuperior.com) was precoated with two applications of polyvinyl alcohol (Rain Repellent, Halfords PLC; www.halfordscompany.com) to prevent cells from sticking to the glass surface and allow free movement of sperm (Wilson-Leedy & Ingermann, 2007). Sperm was initially diluted 1:25 (HBSS 300), followed by a second dilution (1:50) in trypan blue to stain viable cells. Cells were viewed under a compound light microscope (×40 objective, ×400 magnification, Leitz Laborlus S; www.leica-microsystems.com), and the number of sperm cells in each sample was determined as the mean of five independent counts of a 1 μl volume (grid dimensions 1 mm × 1 mm × 0•1 mm, Neubauer haemocytometer). At the final sperm sampling event for each group of fish (day 14 for two-day and seven-day treatment fish, and day 12 for the four-day treatment group), a sub-sample of sperm from each individual male (c. 1 μl) was diluted (1:100) with HBSS and used for assessment of DNA damage (comet assay) as previously outlined.
Statistical analysis of results was conducted with STATGRAPHICS 5.1 (Statistical Graphics Corp.; http://statistical-graphics-corp.software.informer.com/). Concentration response in sperm DNA damage following in vitro exposure to H 2 O 2 was tested by logistic regression. DNA damage following sublethal sperm extraction was tested by general linear model (GLM) on arcsine-transformed % tail DNA data, and the independent variables were sampling frequency and individual fish. The effect of sampling frequency on sperm cell counts was tested by GLM with sampling day and sampling frequency as model factors (effects of individual fish or L T were not significant and removed from the model).
Levels of DNA damage in sperm increased with concentration of H 2 O 2 (in vitro incubation for 10 min) [Fig. 1(a)], and levels of DNA damage in unexposed sperm were 9-12% tail DNA, consistent with recommended controls (Collins, 2004). Two of the 27 males died during the experiment (both from the four-day treatment group apparently because of aggressive interactions between fish), but all other fish appeared normal and had no gross external lesions, abnormal behaviour or reduction in feeding rate. Of the 140 total attempts to collect sperm, 18 (13%) were unsuccessful, and, of these unsuccessful attempts, eight (5•7%) were attributed to two males that were consistently poor at producing sperm for sample collection. Evaluation of DNA damage in sperm from fish that were sampled repeatedly during the 14 day experiment indicated no significant differences in fish sampled every 2, 4 or 7 days [Fig. 1(b)], and low variance among treatments was observed (mean ± s.e. twoday fish = 18•5 ± 0•1, four-day fish = 16•7 ± 0•2 and seven-day fish = 15•8 ± 0•2% tail DNA, n = 7-9 fish per treatment). At time 0, before repeated sampling of sperm began, sperm counts were variable among aquaria in the treatment groups (mean = 2•8 × 10 6 μl -1 , minimum = 0•5 × 10 6 μl -1 and maximum = 6•0 × 10 6 μl -1 ), and time 0 sperm counts were excluded from analysis of the effect of repeated sampling over time. The number of sperm in fish sampled every 2 days decreased 57% after 14 days sampling (mean ± s.e. down from 1•7 ± 0•3 day 2 to 0•7 ± 0•1 day 14 cells × 10 6 , GLM P < 0•01). Fish sampled every 4 days produced 22% lower sperm counts (mean ± s.e. down from 1•8 ± 0•3 day 4 to 1•4 ± 0•1 day 12 cells × 10 6 ), but this decrease was not significant (GLM P > 0•05), and no change in the number of sperm was observed in fish sampled every 7 days (2% decline, mean ± s.e. down from 1•31 ± 0•1 day 7 to 1•28 ± 0•1 day 14 cells × 10 6 , GLM P > 0•05) (Fig. 2). The present results indicate that repeated sampling of sperm can be conducted in D. rerio, and assessment of sperm (including DNA damage) can be included among the endpoints that are tested in numerous investigations that use the D. rerio model. The repeated sperm sampling procedure did not appear to negatively affect fish (i.e. no lesions, abnormal behaviour or alteration in feeding were observed) and indicated that this non-invasive approach can be integrated into experiments with adult fish with minimal adverse effect.
Results indicate that H 2 O 2 -induced DNA damage in D. rerio sperm is similar to that observed in sperm of other organisms. In mammals, sperm exposed in vitro to 100 mM H 2 O 2 had similar levels of DNA damage as reported in D. rerio (this study), with up to 60-70% tail DNA observed in humans Homo sapiens, bulls Bos taurus and mice Mus musculus (Villani et al ., 2010). Integrity of DNA within but the observed decline in sperm count in fish sampled every 4 days was not significant (GLM P > 0•05) and sampling frequency did not affect sperm counts in fish sampled every 7 days (GLM P > 0•05). The curves were fitted by (a) y = -0
sperm is important, as DNA damage in sperm can affect subsequent reproductive success (Zhou et al ., 2006;Lewis & Galloway, 2009), but studies of DNA damage in D. rerio sperm are limited (Uren-Webster et al ., 2010). In this investigation, repeated sampling of sperm from D. rerio did not induce DNA damage regardless of the frequency of sampling, indicating that the sampling procedure did not induce appreciable DNA damage in sperm. The level of in vivo DNA damage in sperm in this study was similar to levels of damage in D. rerio sperm reported in the study of Uren-Webster et al . (2010), in which adult D. rerio sperm had up to 12% tail DNA by comet assay in sperm obtained by crushing testes after euthanasia, slightly higher than control levels reported in Bony et al . (2010) following a similar technique with excised testes. The repeated method for non-invasive sperm sampling is preferable to obtaining sperm via crushing testes because the comet assay can be conducted on a more homogeneous cell type (i.e. mature spermatozoa) with similar sensitivities rather than a mixture of gonad cells of differing sensitivities. Furthermore, the fish do not need to be euthanized. The frequency of sperm sampling affected the sperm concentration, indicating that use of a sampling frequency that does not affect sperm concentration is important. It is possible that the decrease in sperm counts in fish sampled every 2 days, and the non-significant trend of reduced sperm counts in the four-day sampled fish, will become more pronounced over longer sampling periods. Repeated sampling of sperm has been reported to reduce or eliminate sperm present in samples obtained from birds (Lombardo et al ., 2004), however little information is available on the impact of sperm sampling frequency on sperm characteristics in other organisms including important laboratory models.
Sperm production in D. rerio follows a pattern of cystic spermatogenesis over a six-day cycle from early spermatid formation to production of mature spermatozoa (Leal et al ., 2009). The method of sampling in this study is expected to enable assessment of mature spermatozoa only, and the observed decrease in sperm counts in fish sampled every 2 or 4 days is consistent with limitations in capabilities of fish to produce sperm. The effect of repeated sampling on numbers of sperm produced has not been investigated previously in D. rerio. Previous studies with D. rerio have reported large differences in sperm counts ranging from 250 cells μl -1 (Njiwa et al ., 2004), 8•8 × 10 4 cells μl -1 (Tan et al ., 2010) and 8 × 10 6 cells μl -1 (Xu et al ., 2008), but accurate sperm concentration is often not the focus of studies directed at cryopreservation of sperm and preserving sperm quality characteristics (Jing et al ., 2009;Wilson-Leedy et al ., 2009). Lower proportions of spermatozoa and higher proportions of spermatocytes have been reported after histological examination of adult male D. rerio following toxicant exposure (Uren-Webster et al ., 2010); however, assessment of sperm concentration has not been included in any other study that investigated the effects of experimental treatments in D. rerio. Sperm concentration can affect sperm motility (Jing et al ., 2009), an important characteristic for sperm quality, and sperm motility characteristics have been positively correlated to fertilization success in a number of teleost species, including D. rerio (Paull et al ., 2008).
Results of this study indicate that repeated sampling of sperm can be done with minimal effect on adult D. rerio and produce samples that are useful for assessment of sperm quantity and quality measurements. If sperm is sampled too frequently, the number of sperm that are obtained decreases over time, which is probably related to the time required for spermatogenesis to generate mature spermatozoa. The comet assay can be effectively applied to assess DNA damage in D. rerio sperm, as has been done in sperm from other organisms, and repeated sperm sampling from D. rerio does not lead to elevated DNA damage in sperm. Integration of assessments to determine the quantity and quality of sperm into experiments with D. rerio could be applied readily to add information on the effects of different types of experimental treatments on an important component of male reproductive success.

