[SECTION] title
Distribution and genetic status of brown bears in FYR Macedonia: implications for conservation

[SECTION] abstract
Conservation and management of large carnivores is often hampered by the lack of information of basic biological parameters. This is particularly true for brown bears (Ursus arctos) in the Former Yugoslav Republic (FYR) of Macedonia. The bear population in this country is important, as it links bear populations of the central part of the Dinaric-Pindos population and the endangered population to the south in Greece. The aim of this study was to assess bear presence in FYR Macedonia and to provide the first evaluation of the genetic status of the species in this country. Bear presence was assessed through a questionnaire and sign surveys, while the genetic status of the species was evaluated through noninvasive genetic sampling from power poles and microsatellite analysis. The results of the study indicate the continuous and permanent presence of brown bears in FYR Macedonia from the border to Kosovo in the northwest, along the border to Albania and Greece in the south; bear presence around Mount Kožuf in the south of the country was seasonal. High levels of genetic diversity were recorded, and it appears that this bear population is currently not threatened by low genetic variability. Cross-border movements of bears between FYR Macedonia and Greece were documented, indicating the presence of an interconnected population and outlining the necessity for a coordinated international approach in the monitoring and conservation of the species in southeastern Europe.

[SECTION] introduction
While the brown bear (Ursus arctos) is the most widespread bear species in the world, it has disappeared from large parts of its original range in Europe. Centuries of human persecution, as well as fragmentation, degradation, and ultimately loss of habitat have taken their toll on the species (Swenson et al. 2000). This is especially evident in the western and Mediterranean parts of Europe, where brown bears survive mainly in fragmented populations, and many of the smaller populations (e.g., Spain, France, Italy, and Greece) are considered threatened and in need of assistance (Zedrosser et al. 2001;Swenson et al. 2011). The largest remaining bear population in southeastern Europe is the Dinaric-Pindos population (Linnell et al. 2008), which stretches from Slovenia in the north over the entire Dinaric mountain range and all the way into Greece to the south. Despite its international importance for large-scale bear conservation in Europe (Swenson et al. 2000;Zedrosser et al. 2001), detailed and accurate information about the biological and conservation status of these bears, especially in some former Yugoslav countries, is still scarce.
Bears in the Former Yugoslav Republic (FYR) of Macedonia are of considerable conservation importance, as they constitute the link between the bear populations of the central part of the Dinaric-Pindos population (i.e., in Serbia and Montenegro) and the endangered population to the south in Greece, where brown bears reach their southernmost distribution in Europe. Reliable field data from FYR Macedonia on bear distribution and abundance are currently lacking for most of the country. Questionnaire-based information indicates that brown bears are mainly distributed in the mountainous areas in the western, central, and southern parts of FYR Macedonia, and that there is occasional migration into FYR Macedonia from Bulgaria in the east (Stojanov et al. 2010). The population size in FYR Macedonia is estimated at 160-200 individuals (Stojanov et al. 2010); however, this estimate is not based on systematic genetic or other population monitoring methods. Although brown bears are protected according to Articles 9 and 13 of the Law on Hunting of 2009, they are considered to be endangered due to extensive poaching and habitat loss and fragmentation (Stojanov et al. 2010).
For the conservation and management of bears in FYR Macedonia, but also in the entire region of southeastern Europe, a financially feasible, reliable, and rapidly obtained assessment of the conservation status and biology of the species is essential and has been identified as a priority for the implementation of effective conservation and management actions for brown bears in the country (Stojanov et al. 2010). The main goal of our study was to assess brown bear presence in FYR Macedonia and provide the first evaluation of its genetic status in the country. The results of the study are set in the context of the limited information on the biology of the species and the urgent need for effective management and conservation actions for brown bears in FYR Macedonia.

[SECTION] study area
The range of brown bears in FYR Macedonia is dominated by rugged topography with high mountain peaks ranging between 2,300 and 2,800 m. Forests at lower altitudes (700-900 m) are dominated by Italian oak (Quercus frainetto) and Turkey oak (Quercus cerris), and at medium altitudes (900-1,500 m) by oaks (Quercus sp.) and beeches (Fagus sp.). Forests in the subalpine zone (>1,500 m) are dominated by beeches and conifers (Pinus sp.). The local fauna includes all three large carnivores of southern Europe [i.e., brown bears, wolves (Canis lupus), and lynx (Lynx lynx)] (Melovski et al. 2008). The distribution of brown bears in FYR Macedonia also includes all three National Parks (NP) of the country, NP Mavrovo, NP Galichica, and NP Pelister.

[SECTION] assessing the presence of brown bears in fyr macedonia
The survey design to assess bear presence was based mainly on the natural marking and rubbing behavior of bears on wooden poles of the electricity and telephone network (hereafter power poles) that have been treated with creosote and did not use any lure to attract the animals, which makes the method cost-effective. This method for detecting bear presence has been developed and successfully tested in the adjacent bear populations of Greece (Karamanlidis et al. 2007(Karamanlidis et al. , 2010b)). Signs of bear presence on power poles such as bite and claw marks are the most frequent bear signs in the field. They are also durable and provide, therefore, a cumulative history of the presence of the species at a specific location. As power poles are in fixed and easily approachable locations, their inspection is easy, rapid, and consequently reasonably economical (Karamanlidis et al. 2007(Karamanlidis et al. , 2010b)).
Our research efforts focused on the core range of brown bears in the western, central, and southern parts of FYR Macedonia, where power poles were inspected during the initial exploratory surveys in 2008 and 2009 and evaluated based on predefined suitability criteria, such as power pole visibility, type of habitat, and vegetation density (Karamanlidis 2008). The most suitable power poles were selected to create a network of sampling sites for the direct assessment of bear presence, but also for the noninvasive genetic monitoring of the species, which would cover as much of the study area as possible. Barbed-wire hair traps (Kendall and McKelvey 2008;Karamanlidis et al. 2010b) were placed on the poles and inspected monthly (April-October 2008 and2009). In addition, while traveling to the power poles, other indirect signs of bear presence (i.e., tracks, scats, feeding signs) were recorded (Karamanlidis et al. 2007).
Because of the low density of power poles and forestry roads in the central part of southern FYR Macedonia (i.e., the areas around Mount Pelister and Mount Kožuf, Fig. 1), we assessed bear presence in these areas with a questionnaire survey. The questionnaire consisted of ten questions aimed at obtaining information about the respondent (i.e., sex, age, place of residency, profession), information about the presence of bears in the area [i.e., presence/absence of bears, type of presence (i.e., permanent vs. seasonal vs. sporadic), records of reproduction], and information about local human-bear interactions [i.e., damages/no damages caused by bears, types of damages, annual damage frequency, records of bears aggressive towards humans, poaching of bears, and the perceptions of bears by the locals (i.e., dangerous vs. not dangerous, harmful vs. not harmful, aggressive vs. not aggressive)] (Table 1). Whenever possible, interviewed people were asked to specify the geographic locations and the dates of bear sightings and interactions with humans. The respondents were randomly selected during visits to villages in the study area.

[SECTION] evaluation of genetic status
Each tuft of hairs on a spike of the barbed wire was considered a sample and was collected; hair samples were collected without contacting human skin, placed in paper envelopes, and then stored at room temperature in ziplock bags with silica gel (Roon et al. 2003). DNA was extracted using the DNeasy Blood & Tissue kits (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany), following the manufacturer's instructions. All extractions took place in a facility in which amplified DNA had never been handled before.
Each sample was genotyped at the microsatellite loci G1A, G1D, G10H, G10J, G10L, G10U (Paetkau and Strobeck 1994;Paetkau et al. 1998), G10C, G10M, G10P (Paetkau et al. 1995), MU23, MU26, MU50, MU51, MU59 (Taberlet et al. 1997), CXX110 (Proctor et al. 2002), Msut-2 (Kitahara et al. 2000), REN144A06, and REN145P07 (Breen et al. 2001). Sex identification was established through the analysis of the amelogenin gene (Ennis and Gallagher 1994). Thermal cycling was performed using an MJ Research PTC100 thermocycler with 96-well "gold" blocks. PCR buffers and conditions were used according to Paetkau et al. (1998), except that markers were not co-amplified, as co-amplification may reduce the success rates for hair samples (Paetkau, personal communication). We used 3 μl of DNA extract per PCR reaction, except during error checking, when 5 μl was used; in this way, low-quality samples were culled efficiently, and we did not run out of template DNA for samples that required a lot of cleanup. Two millimolars of MgCl 2 was used for all markers except G10J (1.8 mM). Genotyping was performed by the Wildlife Genetics International (Nelson, B.C., Canada). The sizing of the PCR products was performed using capillary electrophoresis. We used an automated sequencer (ABI 310), and genotypes were determined using ABI Genescan and Genotyper version 2.1 software. Error checking and general quality assurance followed the recommendations of Paetkau (2003) and Roon et al. (2003) that have been summarized by Kendall et al. (2008); error rates have been reported according to Kendall et al. (2009). Test for allelic dropout, presence of null alleles, and scoring errors caused by stutter peaks were performed with Micro-Checker version 2. 2.3 (van Oosterhout et al. 2004).
The informativeness of the loci in the study for evaluating genetic diversity was assessed by calculating the polymorphism information content (PIC) (Botstein et al. 1980) in the program PowerMarker version 3.25 (Liu and Muse 2005). To evaluate the suitability of the marker set for identifying individuals, the probability of identity among siblings (P ID-Sib ) (Waits et al. 2001) was calculated using the Gimlet version 1.3.2 software (Valière 2002). The pairs of genotypes that were matched on all but one, two, and three loci (1-MM, 2-MM, and 3-MM pairs) were identified using the program GenAlEx 6 (Peakall and Smouse 2006).
Nuclear DNA diversity was measured as the number of alleles per locus (A), the expected (H e ) and observed heterozygosity (H o ), with the program PowerMarker version 3.25 (Liu and Muse 2005). Deviations from the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE) were tested using the exact probability test implemented in the software Genepop version 4.0.10 (Raymond and Rousset 1995); a Markov chain set to 100 batches, with 5,000 iterations per batch and 10,000 steps of dememorization, was used to obtain an unbiased estimate of the exact probability. Pairwise tests for linkage disequilibrium were performed using Fisher's method (Sokal and Rohlf 1994) with 1,000 batches and 10,000 iterations per batch. P values were adjusted for multiple comparisons using the sequential Bonferroni correction (Rice 1989). Global HWE tests across all loci for heterozygote deficiency and heterozygote excess were performed using Fisher's method.
In order to compare genetic diversity of bears in FYR Macedonia with other well-studied bear populations, we used the reference population approach (Skrbinšek et al. 2012a). In this approach, the locus set of the reference and the studied population are reduced to the loci they both have in common. To correct for unequal sample size, genotypes from the reference population are then resampled with replacement multiple times to the same sample size as that of the studied population, and average allelic richness, expected heterozygosity, and their standard deviations are calculated over all the subsamples. Heterozygosity ratio (H er ) and allelic richness ratio (A rt ) indices are then calculated as the ratio between these summary statistics in the studied population and their subsampling-corrected values in the reference population. This provides a comparison of genetic diversity of the studied population with the reference population and all other populations that have had these indices calculated using the same reference population (Skrbinšek et al. 2012b). We used the data by Skrbinšek et al. (2012b) on brown bears in Slovenia as the reference population since this large dataset has already been used as a reference for comparisons of a large number of brown bear populations around the world. We used the ten loci that our study has in common with the reference dataset (i.e., G1A, G10C, G10D, G10J, G10L, G10M, G10P, MU23, MU50, MU51, and MU59). We applied R-scripts provided by Skrbinšek et al. (2012b) to run the subsampling, with 1,000 random subsamples. All analyses were run in R version 2.14.2 (R Development Core Team 2011). We used heterozygosity ratio (H er ) and allelic richness ratio (A rt ) to compare the genetic diversity of bears in FYR Macedonia with some of the other populations in the Dinaric-Pindos range and the Carpathian Mountains. Because of multiple resampling in the reference population approach, the errors of H er and A rt should be normally distributed, and the Z test (Sokal and Rohlf 1994) was used to test for statistical significance of the difference between these indices in bears in FYR Macedonia and other populations.

[SECTION] presence of brown bears in fyr macedonia
A total of 367 power poles were evaluated during the initial exploratory surveys (2008, N=278; 2009, N=89). Eighty power poles in the study area showed signs of bear marking and rubbing activity; no signs of bear presence were found on power poles in central FYR Macedonia (Fig. 1). From the 80 power poles with signs of bear activity, 45 fitted the suitability criteria by Karamanlidis (2008) and were selected to create a network of stations for assessing bear presence through time and for the noninvasive collection of genetic samples (Fig. 2). Overall, 340 inspections of these 45 hair traps were carried out (hair traps were not inspected in July-September 2008 due to widespread forest fires in the study area), and bear presence was recorded on 85 occasions, mainly in north-and southwestern FYR Macedonia. While traveling for the inspection of the power poles, 11 additional signs of brown bear presence were recorded along forestry roads (six scats, one track, two livestock depredations, one dead bear, and one visual observation). Forty-two questionnaires were conducted in 2009, 29 in the western part of southern FYR Macedonia (Mount Pelister area), and 13 in the central part (Mount Kožuf area) (Fig. 1, Table 1). The majority of people interviewed were males (93 %) with a mean age of 54 years. Respondents were involved in a variety of outdoor-related activities (i.e., 11 % farmers, 11 % hunters, 10 % livestock breeders, 5 % foresters, 53 % other). Eighty-two percent of people interviewed in southwestern FYR Macedonia believed that bear presence in their area was permanent, while the majority of people (67 %) in the Mount Kožuf area believed that bear presence was seasonal.

[SECTION] genetic status of brown bears
The hair traps were inspected 340 times, and 106 hair samples were collected (Table 2). Forty-eight samples were culled prior to the first stage of analysis because they did not contain any follicles; we analyzed 58 samples, obtained a full 18-locus genotype for 20 (34 %) of these samples, and identified 14 unique genotypes [six females (individuals "635," "1080," "1081," "1087," "1830," and "2719") and eight males (individuals "741," "847," "1069," "1454," "1741," "1898," "2464," and "2686")] (Fig. 2). Twelve of the animals were identified in or near NP Mavrovo and NP Pelister, and six individuals were identified on multiple occasions during the study period.
None of the loci used in the study showed evidence of frequency distortion through large allele dropouts or stutter bands or the presence of null alleles. The overall mean of all markers used in the study had a PIC value higher than the recommended value of 0.6 (Buchanan et al. 1993), suggesting a high degree of informativeness of these markers in evaluating genetic diversity (Table 3). The accumulated probability of identity among siblings (P ID-Sib ) for 18 loci was 1.53E-07. A minimum of five most informative loci (G10P, Msut-2, CXX10, G10L, and G10C; accumulated P ID-Sib =7.14E-03) were needed to reach the threshold value of 0.01 recommended for correctly discriminating individuals if the data are to be used for population size estimation (Waits et al. 2001) (Table 3). No samples matching at all but one, two, or three loci were found in All loci used in the study were polymorphic, with the number of alleles per locus ranging between 3 and 9, with a mean of 5.7 (Table 3). The unbiased expected heterozygosity was 0.72, and the mean observed heterozygosity was 0.74. Global tests across loci showed no deviation from HWE (P=0.649), while no locus had a significant deficiency in heterozygotes at the P<0.05 level (Table 3). Statistical tests for linkage disequilibrium were computed for all pairs of loci, and four pairs of loci were found to be in linkage disequilibrium [P(MU26 and Msut-2)=0.003; P(G1D and CXX110)=0.016; P(MU59 and P07)=0.027; P(G10J and G1A)=0.048], but after adjustment of P values for multiple comparisons using the sequential Bonferroni correction, none of the tests (n=153) revealed statistically significant results at a=0.05 (Table 3).

[SECTION] discussion
Assessing distribution is an integral part of monitoring of endangered wildlife populations (Mattson and Merrill 2002;Posillico et al. 2004;Ratnayeke et al. 2007). In the absence of reliable, hard-to-obtain population size estimates of endangered species, changes in distribution can be used to monitor population trends in species of conservation concern (Pollock 2006).
The data collected during the genetic, sign, and questionnaire surveys indicate a permanent and continuous presence of brown bears in FYR Macedonia, from the Šar Planina Mountains at the border to Kosovo in the northwest, along the border to Albania until Mount Baba in the south, and along the border to Greece until Mount Kožuf in the east. Considering the lack of bear damages and the other information obtained from the questionnaires, the presence of bears at Mount Kožuf in the central part of southern FYR Macedonia appears to Author's personal copy be seasonal or sporadic. This is in with results of previous studies based on questionnaires (Stojanov et al. 2010), and data on bear distribution in adjacent areas of Greece (Karamanlidis unpublished data); Mount Kožuf has likely just recently been recolonized by the species. Despite reports of bear presence in central FYR Macedonia (Stojanov et al. 2010), we were unable to find support for this while monitoring the power poles, which would suggest a low population density of bears in this area (Karamanlidis et al. 2007(Karamanlidis et al. , 2010b;;Karamanlidis 2008).
Obtaining measures of genetic diversity of populations with known recent demographic history and conservation status provides a useful approach for comparing diversity levels of populations with unknown history and status and can provide valuable insights into the consequences of rarity, which can be critical for conservation planning (Johnson et al. 2009). When compared with other populations using the reference population approach, the genetic diversity of brown bears in FYR Macedonia was high, which is comparable with the genetic diversity of other bears in the Dinaric-Pindos area and significantly higher than in the endangered bear population in the Apennine Mountains (Table 4). This is difficult to imagine without recent gene flow between FYR Macedonia and at least some other parts of the Dinaric-Pindos bear population, and allows for speculations of a favorable genetic conservation status of brown bears in FYR Macedonia. The small sample size, however, limits the power of between-population comparisons, precludes stronger conclusions, and warrants caution in interpretation of these results. Further research is necessary to confirm these conclusions and further understand the connectivity along the Dinaric-Pindos bear population, which would be important for future population-wide management and conservation.
The results of the questionnaires on human-bear interactions in southern FYR Macedonia generally indicate low levels of conflicts and an overall favorable image of the species. Few incidents of bear damages were recorded by the questionnaire survey, and bears were generally not considered to be dangerous to people. Seven percent (two persons) responded to have heard about aggressive bears; however, the respective incidents occurred 20 and 30 years before the current study. People in the area with bear damages viewed bears as more harmful than people in the area without damages. In general, the results of the questionnaire survey are in accordance with the results of a similar study in the northern part of the country (Lescureux and Linnell 2010) but are in contrast to the situation in neighboring Albania (Karamanlidis et al. 2010c) and Greece (Karamanlidis et al. 2011), where high levels of livestock depredation and a generally negative perception of bears are prevalent. This suggests a more favorable conservation situation for bears in FYR Macedonia; however, this also points out the importance of keeping human-bear conflict levels low through carefully planned management actions.
No indications for poaching were recorded during the questionnaire survey; however, this result must be viewed with caution as it may be related to the secretive and illegal nature of the issue and the resulting wariness of respondents to talk about it, or alternatively that the survey was carried out in areas with low bear densities and few illegal killings.

[SECTION] conservation and management recommendations
The noninvasive genetic sampling efforts enabled the identification of 14 different bears in the western and southwestern part of FYR Macedonia. This number represents roughly 10 % of the population estimated in the country, which is the population identification limit that has been proposed for studies assessing the genetic status of bear populations in the region (Karamanlidis et al. 2010a). The use of a power pole sampling network seems to be applicable as a financially bearable and rapid method for assessing the presence and genetic status of brown bears in the FYR Macedonia, but it is necessary to expand the area covered by the sampling network, while at the same time increasing the sampling frequency.In the areas with known or suspected low bear densities, the power pole sampling method should be augmented with questionnaire surveys carried out in regular intervals. Also the use of multiple sources of genetic sampling [e.g. scats (Bellemain and Taberlet 2004;Skrbinšek et al. 2010)] should be considered (Boulanger et al. 2008). For genetic monitoring purposes, using less than 18 loci would facilitate genotyping of noninvasive samples with lowquantity or low-quality DNA, such as scat or hair with only few follicles.
Future population monitoring efforts should aim at assessing the distribution of bears throughout the entire country to create a distribution map, which should be used as a baseline for the future trend monitoring of bears in the FYR Macedonia (Liu et al. 2009). Population monitoring efforts need also to be coordinated with adjacent countries. Three individuals identified in the study have since been identified also in adjacent Greece (Karamanlidis unpublished data), which indicates the presence of a single interconnected population between the two countries and outlines the necessity for a coordinated international approach in the monitoring and conservation of the species in southeastern Europe. The establishment of a regional genetic bear register (Karamanlidis et al. 2010a) would ensure comparability of genetic data between countries and populations and greatly support cross-border monitoring efforts.

[SECTION] acta theriol
Author's personal copy Author's personal copy
====================================================================================================
FILE: A reliable, single-step method for gender determination in black rhinoceros from low-copy template D.grobid.tei (1).xml
====================================================================================================

[SECTION] title
A reliable, single-step method for gender determination in black rhinoceros from low-copy template DNA

[SECTION] abstract
We describe an accurate, single-step 5 0 exonuclease assay for gender determination of black rhinoceros Diceros bicornis, which targets a single nucleotide polymorphism in exon 4 of the sex-linked zinc finger homologues in this species. This simple, high-throughput method facilitates the multiple-tubes approach that is necessary when using genetic material derived from non-invasive samples such as faecal material.

[SECTION] (no title)
The black rhinoceros (Diceros bicornis) has experienced one of the most dramatic declines of any large vertebrate. Extant populations are small and fragmented and will require translocations between populations to maintain diversity (Emslie and Brooks 1999). A minimum requirement for effective metapopulation strategies is baseline information on population size and sex ratios, which for some populations of black rhinoceros are absent due to the species' cryptic nature and the dense vegetation in areas they inhabit (Mulama and Okita 2002). Molecular identification and sex determination from non-invasive samples, such as DNA derived from faecal material, is potentially a key aspect to this species' conservation management (Foose 2001;Okita-Ouma et al. 2007). However the phenomena of allelic dropout associated with genotyping low-copy, poor-quality DNA, typical of that extracted from faeces, necessitates a ''multiple tubes'' approach, whereby the same sample is genotyped multiple times (Taberlet et al. 1999); this is particularly important for molecular sexing where the failure to detect a Y-chromosome marker in males will lead to incorrect gender assignment (Broquet and Petit 2004). Thus, an inexpensive, highthroughput and yet accurate method for sex determination of black rhinoceros from faecal DNA is desirable. An existing two-step STR profiling approach for molecular sex determination in the black rhinoceros could be bettered if it was a single-step approach which reduced not only the time and cost of gender profiling, but also the chances of contamination (Peppin et al. 2010). We report a 5 0 exonuclease assay that utilizes TaqMan Ò probes to detect a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) that distinguishes the sex-linked zinc finger homologues (ZFX/Y) in the black rhinoceros.
Tissue and faecal samples of wild black rhinoceros of known sex were collected from 36 animals from 6 populations across Kenya, with tissue samples from six males and six females used to provide material to obtain a 604 bp sequence from exon 4 of the ZFX and ZFY homologues. DNA extractions from tissue were performed using the Qiagen DNeasy Blood anTissue Kit (Qiagen), with DNA extracted from faecal samples using a QIAamp Ò DNA Stool Mini Kit (Qiagen).
ZFX and ZFY multiplex PCRs were undertaken in 50 ll volume containing 19 AccuPrime TM Pfx buffer (Invitrogen), 100 lM each dNTP, 0.5 lM of ZFY0097 [5 0 -CATC CTTTGACTGTCTATCCTTG-3 0 (Palsbøll et al. 1992)] and P2-3EZ [5 0 -GCACTTCTTTGGTATCTGAGAAAGT-3 0 (Aasen and Medrano 1990)], 1.5 l AccuPrime TM Pfx DNA polymerase (Invitrogen), 0.1 lg/ll BSA and 50 ng template DNA. Thermal cycling conditions were: 94 °C for 45 s, followed by 25 cycles of 94 °C for 45 s, 59 °C for 45 s, 72 °C for 1 min 15 s, and 72 °C for 10 min on a MJ Research PTC-200 thermal cycler. PCR amplicons were purified using QIAquick PCR purification kit (Qiagen) and cloned using TOPO Ò TA Cloning Kit Ò (Invitrogen); recombinant plasmids were isolated, purified and then sequenced using BigDye Terminator v.3.1 chemistry (Applied Biosystems) and electrophoresis on an ABI3100 (Applied Biosystems). All sequences were aligned and the plasmid DNA excised in silico using Geneious Pro v.4.04.
The 604 bp ZFX sequences (Genbank accession: EU284593) were invariant for males and females, and ZFY sequences (Genbank accession: EU284594) were invariant for males. Gene identity was checked by aligning with orthologous sequences for Homo sapiens (Genbank accession: M26946, J03134). Primers and probes for the 5 0 exonuclease assay were designed according to published guidelines (Morin et al. 1999;Smith et al. 2002). The assay targeted a 94-bp region of the ZFX-ZFY sequences with a synonymous nucleotide difference (C to T) at nucleotide 402. The forward primer (ZFXY_Rhino_12F) was 5 0 -GTC CACAGCAAGAACTTTCCTCATA-3 0 and the reverse primer (ZFXY_Rhino_12R) was 5 0 -CAGTATGGATTCG-CATGTGCTTTT-3 0 . Probes were synthesised with a 5 0 reporter dye (FAM for ZFX_Rhino; HEX for ZFY_Rhino) and a 3 0 quencher (NFQ). The probe sequences were (ZFX_ Rhino) 5 0 -AAACCTTTACCACACTCC-3 0 and (ZFY_ Rhino) 5 0 -ACCTTTACCGCACTCC-3 0 (Fig. 1). The 5 0 exonuclease assays were performed in 25 ll reactions containing 1-20 ng of template DNA, 19 PCR buffer (Qiagen), 200 lM each dNTP, 1.25 l HotStarTaq polymerase (Qiagen), 0.4 lg/ll BSA and 19 TaqMan Assay reaction mix (Applied Biosystems). Amplifications were performed in a MX3000P real-time PCR system (Stratagene) with an initial incubation of 15 min at 95 °C followed by 50 cycles of 95 °C for 20 s and 60 °C for 1 min 30 s. The assay was validated using DNA extracted from tissue samples of 8 confirmed males and 8 confirmed females and then tested for accuracy in assigning gender from faecal DNA from another 12 males and 12 females, with the latter (faecal) samples genotyped twice (i.e. a limited multiple-tubes approach). These validations were based on different animals from Kenya than those used to design the assay (Fig. 2).
The 5 0 exonuclease assay method proved capable of reliable sex-determination in black rhinoceros, with a 100 % PCR success and 100 % correct gender assignment Fig. 1 Alignment of exon 4 of ZFX and ZFY of black rhinoceros detailing the region amplified using primers ZFXY_Rhino_12F (solid arrow) and ZFXY_Rhino_12R (dashed arrow). The grey shaded regions show the binding sites of the sex-specific Taqman Ò probes; and the relevant synonymous nucleotide difference is shown boxed for all assays based on tissue samples, and *87.5 % (42/ 48) PCR success rate using faecal DNA. In the 6 instances of PCR failure using DNA derived from faecal material, the multiple-tubes approach nonetheless ensured correct gender determination for all animals accept one (*4.2 %), which failed to amplify for either probe in both reactions.
The extremely sensitive automated method we report has the combined benefits of facilitating a large number of replicates to be performed very easily at comparatively low cost, with an output which is proportional to PCR product amplification and clearly defined clusters according to gender (Morin et al. 2005).
====================================================================================================
FILE: Examining the use of fecal pellet morphometry to differentiate age classes in Sonoran pronghorn.grobid.tei (1).xml
====================================================================================================

[SECTION] title
Examining the use of fecal pellet morphometry to differentiate age classes in Sonoran pronghorn

[SECTION] abstract
Wildlife managers require knowledge of population demographics, yet for low-density, wide-ranging species procuring demographic information is challenging. While accurate abundance estimates can be costly and difficult to obtain, recruitment and survival trends can be used as an alternative indicator of a population's trajectory. Physical capture has been the traditional practice for obtaining these demographic parameters, yet capture-related stress can lead to reduced levels of fitness, impaired locomotion, or even mortality for some species. Thus, noninvasive sampling methods may provide an alternative to physical capture. Population monitoring of endangered Sonoran pronghorn Antilocapra americana sonoriensis is critical for assessing the success of recovery efforts, and monitoring annual survival and recruitment by age class would provide information on the trajectory of population growth. We measured noninvasively collected Sonoran pronghorn fecal pellets collected post-fawning in Arizona, USA and matched to known age animals using fecal DNA genotyping to determine the feasibility of distinguishing age class by pellet dimensions. Based on cross-validation with logistic regression predictive models, we estimated a 98% probability of correct classification of fawn versus yearling and fawn versus adult using pellet width as a single explanatory variable. We could not, however, distinguish between yearling and adult. We additionally evaluated our ability to classify age class of fecal pellets by visual assessment only, and this approach was unreliable. Thus, we recommend measuring pellets for more accurate age classification. This measurement method is simple, relatively inexpensive, and shows potential for use in wild populations of pronghorn to discriminate fawns from other age classes. When combined with individual identification using fecal DNA, this approach could provide better knowledge of recruitment and age-specific survival for this and other species.

[SECTION] (no title)
A comprehensive understanding of population demographic metrics, such as abundance, survival and recruitment, is important for managing wildlife species, yet these parameter estimates are often expensive and difficult to obtain. Alternatively, in large mammals, managers often monitor trends in recruitment and survival as an indicator of a population's trajectory (Peek 2003, DeCesare et al. 2012). In some cases, trends may be more easily obtained, particularly for lowdensity, wide-ranging species which are inherently difficult to monitor due to low detection rates. However, recruitment can be difficult to document in some species as juveniles quickly become the same size as adults, and visual assessment of age is often incorrect (Smith 1988, Garel et al. 2006). Survival among age classes varies broadly, and thus knowledge of age structure is essential to accurately assess population demographics. It is widely accepted that for ungulates, adults generally have higher survival rates and elasticity than juveniles, and adult females typically have higher survival rates than adult males (Gaillard et al. 1998(Gaillard et al. , 2000)). However, due to high variability, juvenile survival typically has a greater impact on population dynamics (Gaillard et al. 1998, 2000, Raithel et al. 2007, Harris et al. 2008). Thus for endangered populations, estimates of juvenile survival are often a strong indicator of population health and viability and a valuable metric for managers.
Sonoran pronghorn exist exclusively in the Sonoran Desert of southern Arizona and northern Mexico and are federally listed under the Endangered Species Act (USFWS 1998) and as "most endangered" under CITES Appendix 1 (Hoffmann et al. 2008). While believed to number in the thousands in the 1800s (O'Gara and Yoakum 2004), the population declined from 250 animals in 1991 to fewer than 50 individuals in 2003 in the United States (US) range (USFWS 2015) purportedly due to drought, habitat loss and fragmentation due to fencing and human activity along the US-Mexico border (USFWS 1998, O'Gara and Yoakum 2004, Wilson et al. 2010). Subsequently, a 2.56-km 2 captive breeding pen was established on the Cabeza Prieta National Wildlife Refuge (CPNWR) to facilitate recovery efforts, and captive individuals are released annually into the wild  (Otte 2006). In summer 2013, there were approximately 100 captive individuals in the pen. Population estimates for the wild population are derived from a biennial aerial count, and the population size in 2014 was estimated at 202 individuals (95% CI: 171-334; USFWS 2015). The aerial survey does not provide recruitment estimates as only a proportion of individuals are observed during the survey are classified to sex or age class due to the potential for disturbance caused by the aircraft needing to fly low to accurately perform these classifications (J. J. Hervert, Arizona Game and Fish Dept, pers. comm.). Survival is also not estimated.
Assigning age through traditional methods (e.g. examining tooth wear or tooth replacement) to an individual to track it throughout its lifetime usually involves capture and handling which can be expensive, dangerous and potentially injurious or lethal to the animal (Murray and Fuller 2000, Arnemo et al. 2006, Solberg et al. 2006). Pronghorn are especially sensitive to stress and mortality from capture (Kreeger et al. 2002), and myopathy is not an uncommon consequence during capture and handling (Chalmers andBarrett 1977, Bright andHervert 2005, Yoakum et   1987). A combination of length and width distinguished age classes in Manipur brow-antlered deer Cervus eldi eldi (Khan and Goyal 1993) and Svalbard reindeer Rangifer tarandus platyrhynchus (Morden et al. 2011). Pellet weight also corresponded to body weight in moose (MacCracken and Van Ballenberghe 1987) and Manipur brow-antlered deer (Khan and Goyal 1993). Bubenik (1982) additionally found sex-specific differences in pellet shape in elk Cervus elaphus. Ball (2010) and Morden et al. (2011) suggest combining aging by measurements with fecal DNA for estimating demographic parameters in ungulate species.
The use of noninvasively obtained DNA samples (e.g. feces, hair, saliva) as a tool for measuring population parameters has become common in mammal populations. Methods such as fecal DNA microsatellite analysis have proven to be a useful tool for estimating demographic parameters, such as abundance, survival or sex ratio (Waits and Paetkau 2005, Schwartz et al. 2007, Beja-Pereira et al. 2009, De Barba et al. 2010). One weakness of this method, however, is the difficulty to age individuals with noninvasive genetic samples, yet understanding the age structure of a population is central to understanding age-specific survival and recruitment. The ability to distinguish age classes greatly improves the applicability of noninvasive genetic sampling and thus would be especially useful in a monitoring program designed to measure key demographic parameters such as population size, survival rates and recruitment. Here, we examine the use of fecal pellet dimensions of endangered Sonoran pronghorn Antilocapra americana sonoriensis to distinguish between fawns, yearlings and adults.
Our specific objectives were to determine if pellet size (either single measurement, e.g. length, or a combination of measurements, e.g. length  width) and shape could be used to distinguish age class and to test our ability to determine age class by visual assessment of pellet size and morphology in the field. We expected adult pellets would be larger than yearling and fawn and yearling pellets would be larger than fawn. We also predicted we would be able to assign coarse age class (i.e. fawn 1 year or non-fawn   1 year) in the field based on visual assessment of size and morphology.

[SECTION] study area
The Sonoran Desert has average high temperatures of over 38°C in summer and is one of the hottest and driest regions of North America (INRMP 2003). From June to October, temperatures can exceed 32°C for more than 100 consecutive days on CPNWR (USFWS 2002). Average annual precipitation on the CPNWR ranges from 20 cm in the east to 7.5 cm in the west falling in monsoons during July-August and December-January (USFWS 2002). April to June is the dry season.
In May and June of 2012-2014, we collected pronghorn fecal pellets in the captive pen and from wild individuals at 12 developed watering holes (hereafter drinkers) and nine sites not associated with drinkers on Organ Pipe National Monument (ORPI), CPNWR, and the adjacent Barry M. Goldwater Range (BMGR) in southwest Arizona, USA (Fig. 1). The 2.56 km 2 captive pen holds two separate populations which total ∼100 free ranging individuals (USFWS 2015), and the wild population in the US  2015). Arizona Game and Fish Department (AZGFD) and US Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) personnel provide alfalfa at feed stations both in the wild and the pen. Conditions in the pen are kept as natural as possible and portions of the pen are irrigated to encourage growth of natural forage. Fawning starts in the pen in mid-February and most fawns are born in March and April (Wilson et al. 2008). Wild pronghorn are fed alfalfa weekly during the dry months at six of the 12 drinkers outside the pen. Feeding and watering typically begin in April or May and continue through October or November depending on annual rainfall amounts (J. Atkinson, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, pers. comm.). In the wild, fawns are typically born between February and June with one birth reported as early as January in 2013 (Bright andHervert 2005, USFWS 2015).

[SECTION] sample collection
Each December, annual capture operations are conducted in the captive pen by AZGFD and USFWS, during which individuals are captured, radio-collared, and a blood sample is collected. Fawns captured in the pen are ear-tagged, and radio-collared if recaptured in subsequent captures. Young of the year are easily identified (e.g. size, horn development) and classified as fawn (0-11 months), and individuals captured as fawns in the previous year are known yearlings (12-23 months). However, not all fawns are caught during annual capture operations and consequently, an individual may not be handled until it is  1 year old and is potentially misclassified as to actual age. Thus, all captured animals of unknown age are classified as adults. Some captured (captive) individuals are subsequently released into the wild, at a ratio of approximately two males to one female (USFWS 2015). To obtain DNA, blood samples were collected from 58 captured individuals in December 2012 and 2013 when feasible (i.e. if health and safety of the animal was not at risk due to stress) (USFWS 2015). These samples provided a genotype of an individual of known age class for later matching to genotypes obtained from fecal pellets collected in the pen or in the wild.
In May 2012 in the captive pen, we collected five fecal pellets (per Morden et al. 2011) less than 24 h old from each of 185 fecal pellet piles in three pellet size groups defined visually as small, medium, and large. Size refers to the pellet, not size of pile, and all pellets from a pile were given the same size classification. While we recognize our size classification is subjective, we wanted to ensure collection of all age and sex classes, and this size classification was used only to structure collection and was not part of the analyses. To ensure collection of samples less than 24 h old, we cleared pellets from the area around feed stations in the captive pen on the day prior to collection. We collected fresh pellets as our pilot studies indicated low nuclear DNA (used for individual identification) PCR success rates (2-28%) by day 14 and 0% by day 60 (Woodruff et al. 2015, Woodruff unpubl.). We excluded piles that appeared to be from more than one at 63°C decreasing 0.5°C each cycle, and a 60 s extension at 72°C, followed by 34 cycles of a 30 s denaturation at 94°C a 90 s annealing step at 53°C, and a 60 s extension at 72°C. The cycle finished with a 30 min final extension at 60°C. We initially screened all samples with two PCR replicates to assess sample quality, and samples failing to amplify at  5 loci were dropped from additional genotyping to remove low quality, error-prone samples from the dataset. To obtain a consensus genotype, three to eight PCR replicates were performed per sample. Consensus genotypes were based on multiple runs of a sample as follows: 1) for homozygotes, the allele was present at least three times, and 2) for heterozygotes, we had to see each allele at least two times. We repeated this testing and evaluating process until we obtained a consensus genotype at a minimum of seven loci to meet the matching criteria of  0.01 probability of identity siblings (P(ID)sibs) (Waits et al. 2001). Consensus genotypes were determined in Microsoft Access (Skrbinsek 2010), and matching and P(ID)sibs analysis was conducted in GenAlEx 6.5 (Peakall and Smouse 2006). Within the captive pen, fecal pellet genotypes were first matched to other fecal pellet genotypes. Then, unique genotypes were matched to genotypes of blood samples for individuals of known age. In the wild population, fecal pellet genotypes were matched to other fecal pellet genotypes, and individuals redetected in year two were then known to be  1 year old (non-fawn).

[SECTION] pellet dimension measurements
Using digital calipers we measured (mm) maximum length (L), maximum width (W), and calculated length-to-width ratio (L/W), and approximate volume (V: 4/3p (L/2)(W/2) 2 ; volume of an ellipsoid -the approximate shape of pellets), where W is used for width and diameter, of each of the five pellets per sample from the captive pen within two hours of sample collection. We calculated the mean measurements of the five pellets to represent the sample. From wild individuals, we attempted to measure five pellets from at least one pellet group from each individual (confirmed by DNA analysis). However, we did not always have enough pellets postextraction for measuring, and thus not all individuals had a measured sample. Samples with fewer than two pellets were discarded and we excluded broken, split, or partial pellets as recommend by Zahratka and Buskirk (2007). To evaluate the effect of time and desiccation on the measurements, we re-measured 16 samples after seven days of exposure to local field conditions and reran the calculations. Mean daily high temperature was 37.3°C (range: 33.6-40.7°C), and there was no precipitation during this 7-day period.

[SECTION] statistical analysis
We conducted all statistical analyses using R ver. 3.1.2 (< www.r-project.org >). We used t-tests with an alpha of 0.05 to examine differences in pellet measurements between captive and wild individuals and between measured (fresh) and re-measured (7-day old) samples. We used logistic regression to distinguish between age classes. Using logistic regression (brglm function, R package brglm; Kosmidis 2013), we evaluated the predictive accuracy of models using individual based on pellet shape, color and size to minimize the potential for wasted effort in the laboratory, as these are likely mixed samples. We placed pellets in paper coin envelopes and stored them at room temperature in a plastic ziploc bag with ∼ 250 ml of silica desiccant to minimize DNA degradation prior to analysis (Soto-Calderon et al. 2009, DeMay et al. 2013). To determine the age of the individual from which the fecal sample was collected, we matched 7-16 locus microsatellite genotypes of fecal samples to the blood samples.
Due to high rates of capture myopathy, only limited capture and radio-collaring of wild Sonoran pronghorn occurs, and the majority of marked animals in the wild are captive released individuals (USFWS 2015). To test our ability to assign age class, fawn or non-fawn ( 1 year old), in the wild population, we measured pellet samples collected from wild pronghorn in May and June of both 2013 and 2014 as part of a larger mark-recapture study (or detection-redetection since there is no physical capture; Woodruff et al. 2016). We visited drinkers when pronghorn had left the area and collected fecal pellets surrounding feed stations and drinkers. At least six pellets from each sample were collected, and stored as described above. We collected six pellets per sample to ensure we had a sufficient number of pellets to perform two DNA extractions (Woodruff et al. 2015). Samples were initially field-classified as fawn or non-fawn based on visual assessment of size and morphology. We had two sources of known age wild individuals: 1) genotypes of known age individuals released from the captive pen obtained from blood samples, which consisted of two known adults captive released in 2012 and sampled (i.e. through fecal pellets) in the wild in 2013, and 2) 15 individuals redetected in 2014 (thus, known non-fawn) from fecal pellet genetic analysis in 2013.

[SECTION] dna extraction and genotyping
DNA extraction of blood samples was conducted using a Qiagen DNeasy blood and tissue kit (n  10) or by overnight lysis with ProteinaseK (10 mg ml -1 ) at 55°C, followed by a modified protocol (n  48) based upon the standard phenol/chloroform extraction and isopropanol/sodium acetate precipitation (Sambrook et al. 1989). We used Phase Lock gel tubes (5-Prime) to aid in the separation between organic and aqueous phases and resuspended the DNA in Low TE (10 mM Tris-pH 8.0, 0.01 mM EDTA). Fecal pellet DNA was extracted using the QIAamp DNA Stool Mini Kit following methods described in Adams et al. (2011) and Woodruff et al. (2015). For individual ID, ten nuclear DNA (nDNA) microsatellite loci ranging in size from 90-278 base pairs and one sex ID locus were amplified in a single multiplex reaction (Lou 1998, Carling et al. 2003, Munguia-Vega et al. 2013). The 7 ml PCR reaction contained 1  Qiagen Master Mix, 0.5  Qiagen Q-Solution, 1.71 mM Anam97, 0.04 mM Anam50, 0.07 mM Anam82, 0.01 mM Anam79, 0.86 mM Aam13, 0.43 mM Aam11, 0.14 mM ADCYC, 0.26 mM Aam10, 0.04 mM Aam1, 0.04 mM Aam2, 0.29 mM KY (sex ID), and 1.5 ml DNA extract. The PCR profile included an initial denaturation of 95°C for 15 min, followed by a touchdown of 20 cycles with a 30 s denaturation at 94°C, 90 s annealing step

[SECTION] pellet size and age class
For both captive and wild, length, width and volume of yearling and adult (or non-fawn) pellets were greater than fawns, but length-width ratio was larger for fawns, indicating fawn pellets were rounder than either yearling or adult pellets (Fig. 2, Table 3a). Probability of correct age class classification for captive fawn versus yearling using a single variable was 0.98 for width only and was the best AIC c ranked model (Table 4a). Other single variable models and combinations of  2 explanatory variables performed similarly with predictive probability ranging from 0.91 to 0.98 and delta AIC c s (difference in AIC c compared to the lowest AIC c ) from 1.66 to 7.16. Length as a single explanatory variable was the worst ranked model with probability of correct classification of 0.77 and delta AIC c value of 7.16. The null model (i.e. the model with no explanatory variables) had probability of correct classification of 0.32 (i.e. if we each measurement (e.g. length, volume) as a single predictor variable, as well as models using all possible combinations of the predictor variables (e.g. length and volume). Predictive accuracy was estimated using randomized five-fold crossvalidation with the cvFit function from the R package cvTools (Alfons 2012) with 100 replications, and models were also ranked using Akaike's information criterion corrected for small sample size (AIC c ). To avoid infinite parameter estimates due to complete or quasi-complete separation, the model parameters were estimated using bias-reduced maximum likelihood (Firth 1993, Kosmidis andFirth 2009). Probability of correct classification was compared to a null model (i.e. no explanatory variables) where the predictive accuracy depends only on the base rate of classes in the population (e.g. if 60% of the population are adults, then prediction accuracy would be 60% if every sample were called adult).
For age class, cross validation analyses indicated that it was not possible to reliably distinguish between yearlings and adults based on pellet morphology significantly better than using the base rate (probability  0.69-0.72; null model probability  0.67), so our age class analysis focused on separate analyses distinguishing fawn from yearling and fawn from adult. We used only known age captive individuals and known age captive released wild individuals for age class analysis (i.e. excluded wild individuals of unknown age). Finally, we combined yearlings and adults into a single age class (non-fawn) and tested the accuracy of our visual fieldclassification of wild samples by age class, i.e. fawn or nonfawn. We used the fitted model developed from known age individuals (captive fawns and captive and wild non-fawns) to predict age class of wild samples. We used models with single explanatory variables of width and volume because these were two of the best AIC c ranked models for predicting age class. In cases where the model-predicted age class differed in multiple samples from the same individual (i.e. one predicted adult, one predicted fawn), we ran an additional model (length  length-width ratio).

[SECTION] results
We collected 185 pellet groups from 58 small, 69 medium and 58 large (visual classification) fecal pellet piles from the captive pen (Supplementary material Appendix 1 Fig. A1). From these, we confirmed consensus genotypes for 176 which were matched and found to represent 67 individuals or approximately 85% of the pronghorn in the pen in 2012 (USFWS 2015). During physical capture of captive animals, we obtained 58 blood samples over two years from known age individuals. We genotyped and matched 33 of the blood samples (four adults, 17 yearlings, 12 fawns) to 87 fecal samples (Table 2). The remaining 98 pellet piles were not matched to known age individuals and were not included in our analyses. All samples collected in the captive pen were measured, and the number of samples per individual averaged 2.8 (range 1-8). From the wild, we measured 258 samples across years. We did not find significant differences between measurements of fresh pellets and pellets re-measured (n  16) after seven days (p  0.05).  those of captive non-fawns (Fig. 3). Mean length-width pellet ratio, however, was consistent for non-fawn captive (1.59) and wild (1.68) individuals. Pellet length, width and volume were significantly different between captive and wild non-fawns (Table 3b). For fawns, only pellet width was significantly different between captive and wild individuals.

[SECTION] prediction of age class from wild pellet samples
In 2014, we redetected 15 individuals (n  39 samples), thus known to be non-fawn ( 1 year old). All samples from redetected individuals were correctly model-predicted as non-fawn in either the width only or volume only model (Table 5, Supplementary material Appendix 1 Table A1).
Ten unique individuals (a total of 16 samples) had conflicting model-predicted (width only and volume only models) age class (i.e. one model predicted non-fawn, one predicted fawn). There was no consistency in which model (e.g. width only) predicted fawn or non-fawn in these cases. For eight of these individuals, we measured multiple samples, guess fawn, we will be right 32% of the time because 32% of our samples were fawn).
The best AIC c ranked model for captive fawn versus adult again included pellet width only with probability of correct age class classification of 0.98 (Table 4b). The volume only model and combinations of  2 explanatory variables performed similarly with predictive probability ranging from 0.93 to 0.97 and delta AIC c s from 1.46 to 8.41. Length and length-width ratio as single explanatory variables were the worst ranked models with probability of correct classification of 0.85 and 0.77 and delta AIC c values of 17.77 and 26.65, respectively. The null model (i.e. the model with no explanatory variables) had probability of correct classification of 0.50 (i.e. 50% of pellet samples were adult and 50% were fawn).

[SECTION] captive versus wild measurements of pellets
Mean length, width and volume of wild non-fawn pellets ( 1 year as evidenced by redetection) were smaller than In 2013, only one sample that was visually field-classified as non-fawn (n  119) was model-predicted as fawn, whereas three samples visually field-classified as fawn were subsequently model-predicted as non-fawn (Table 5, Supplementary material Appendix 1 Table A1). Similarly, in 2014, 98% (n  62) of samples visually field-classified as non-fawn were model-predicted as non-fawn, but only 33% (n  22) of samples field-classified as fawn were model-predicted fawn. Nearly all samples (46 of 49 in the years combined) incorrectly visually field-classified as fawn were male.

[SECTION] discussion
Understanding age-specific survival rates is critical to management and identifying long-term trends in population growth, particularly in endangered species, yet documenting age-specific survival relies on knowing age structure. We successfully demonstrated the ability to distinguish fawns from yearlings or adults using morphometric pellet measurements of Sonoran pronghorn. While we did not have enough predictive power to separate yearlings and adults, an understanding of recruitment rates and fawn survival is important in determining the trajectory of the population. This measurement method provides a reliable way to document fawns, and the use of fecal DNA for individual identification further strengthens the method's utility as individuals can be tracked over multiple years of sampling.
and we took the majority model-predicted classification (i.e. four model-predicted as non-fawn, two model-predicted as fawn, we called it non-fawn). The two other individuals were single detections (i.e. we had only one sample) for which we ran an additional fitted model (length  lengthwidth ratio) and used the age class that was predicted twice (i.e. volume and width models both predicted fawn, and length  length-width ratio predicted adult, we called the individual fawn).
Correct visual field-classification by age class varied considerably between years. In 2013, we measured 128 samples from 76% (n  72 individuals) of the total wild individuals we detected (i.e. detected their genotype) (Table 2). Ninety-six percent of visual field-based classifications matched the model predictions (Supplementary material Appendix 1 Table A1). In 2014, we measured 130 samples from 64 individuals, and 65% of samples were correctly field-classified by visual observation (i.e. matched the model prediction).   Van Ballenberghe (1987) where correct classification was similar for males and females. In 2014, two redetected individuals made up 24% (n  11) of the samples incorrectly field-classified as fawn. One of these individuals was fieldclassified and model predicted as fawn in 2013 and would putatively be a yearling in 2014 perhaps providing explanation for the misclassification. The other individual was detected at a site with supplemental feed and field-classified and model predicted as non-fawn in 2013. However, in 2014 this individual was redetected at a site with no supplemental feed and was field-classified as fawn in all samples, but model-predicted as adult in 64% (n  7) of samples.
While based on only a single individual, this strengthens the idea that fed individuals produce larger pellets (Hummel et al. 2008). We recognize the weaknesses of our visual assessment method, including the skill level and subjectivity of observers, but we felt it was valuable to test the method. With in-depth training of observers (as seen in 2013), the accuracy of this method could be improved.
In turn, we recommend measuring pellets when trying to determine age class to increase accuracy. We also note that developing a model based on measurements from wild pronghorn would strengthen predictive power. However, we posit that when obtaining samples from wild individuals is not feasible, samples from captive animals provide a reasonable surrogate (Chapman 2004).

[SECTION] management implications
In species that are highly sensitive to capture and disturbance, like Sonoran pronghorn, noninvasive genetic sampling methods are an appealing alternative approach for obtaining critical demographic data. Managers of Sonoran pronghorn do not have current sex and age-based survival estimates because these data cannot be obtained with the current aerial survey approach used for population estimation

[SECTION] pellet size and age class
Our visual classification of pellets of captive pronghorn by size (small, medium, large) was a mechanism to facilitate collection of all age and sex classes and was not used in the analysis, but our results indicate this was an appropriate collection method for obtaining a range of age classes for our analyses. As expected, pellet size was larger for yearlings and adults than for fawns. The probability of correctly assigning age class models was similar for fawns and yearlings and fawns and adults and performed notably better than the null models (null probability 0.32 and 0.50, respectively). On the other hand, both Morden et al. (2011) and MacCracken and Van Ballenberghe (1987) found higher rates of correct model classification for adults compared to juveniles. Contrary to other studies (Delibes-Mattos et al. 2009, Morden et al. 2011), our cross-validation analysis showed that single measure models assigned age class with roughly the same accuracy as models with multiple variables. Our small sample size (n  4) for adults is perhaps the reason we could not distinguish between adults and yearlings. Collecting and measuring fecal pellets from additional known adults would potentially allow for this distinction. Some variables were correlated as would be expected given that two variables (length-width ratio and volume) are calculated using combinations of the other variables, and length and width also tend to be correlated. Thus, it is not surprising that models with additional variables generally did not substantially outperform the width-only model.

[SECTION] captive versus wild
Similar to other research, our results suggest that the most accurate predictive models are built from samples collected from the target population (MacCracken and Van Ballenberghe 1987, Chapman 2004, Morden et al. 2011). Differences in diet (e.g. seasonal variation, captive versus wild) can affect size of fecal output (Campos-Arceiz et al. 2008, Morden et al. 2011) and defecation rate (Rogers 1987, Mayle et al. 1996, Chapman 2004, Ferretti et al. 2014) with both reduced (Irby 1981, Asa et al. 1985, Rogers 1987, Kitchen and Martin 1996, Chapman 2004) and increased defecation rates in captive individuals (Smith 1964, Dinerstein andDublin 1982). Brashares and Arcese (1999a, b) suggest dominant male oribi Ourebia ourebi restrict defecation volume and occurrence in order to increase the frequency of territory marking events. Consequently, there could be differences in defecation rate, and potentially pellet size, between captive and wild individuals, as well as fed and unfed individuals in the wild. However, we believe that our approach to develop predictive models using captive individuals was justified and effective for multiple reasons. First, in our study system, any future fecal DNA sampling will be conducted at drinkers, nearly 50% of which also provide supplemental feed. Additionally, as conditions in the pen are semi-natural, captive pronghorn also feed on natural forage year-round due to irrigated forage plots. Second, we were able to test our methods on 15 wild animals known to be non-fawn. All were correctly identified as non-fawn by the model-prediction. Third, length-width ratios between captive and wild animals were not significantly different and (USFWS 2015). Because we measured samples collected in May and June and relatively soon after fawning, we do not know at what age fawn samples are no longer distinguishable from adults. Thus, it would be beneficial to collect and measure samples several times throughout the year to determine at what age fawns can no longer be reliably distinguished by pellet size. Also, as recruitment for ungulates is typically estimated when young are ∼6-9 months of age (DeCesare et al. 2012, Christianson andCreel 2014), alternative timing of pellet collection might be preferable. However, fecal pellet DNA sampling for population monitoring (i.e. sufficient sample size) is likely feasible only during the months when pronghorn are congregating at watering holes (April-June) due to the hot, dry conditions (Woodruff et al. 2016). Accuracy of age classification could potentially be improved by developing separate models for sites with and without supplemental feed, as our limited data (not shown) indicates pellets from individuals at sites with supplemental feed are larger. We also note that while seven days of weathering did not alter the pellet measurements, results could differ if pellets are older than seven days. Additional pilot studies are needed to evaluate this. However, other research shows older Sonoran pronghorn pellets have lower DNA amplification success rates, and if the objective is to use these measurement methods in conjunction with individual identification from fecal DNA, pellets older than seven days will be of little use (Woodruff et al. 2015).
While we could not determine sex using morphological methods (data not shown), sex is easily ascertained using genetic methods, and our method shows strong potential for use in wild populations of pronghorn to distinguish fawns from yearlings or adults. The ability to distinguish age structure using fecal pellet measurements greatly improves the applicability of fecal pellet collection and has significant implications for management of the Sonoran pronghorn population. We recommend analyzing pellets using both single width and volume variable models and running the combined model (length  length-width ratio) if the width and volume models disagree. A long-term monitoring scheme combining pellet measurements with individual identification using DNA would allow the identification of fawns that would remain known age individuals for the remainder of the monitoring years. This would provide a powerful tool for documenting the population's age and sex structure, annual recruitment, and age-specific annual survival rates. As research has shown, distinguishing age classes is possible in other ungulate species, and as the use of noninvasive genetic methods increases in ungulates, these methods could potentially be applied to other species.

