[SECTION] title
Four methods of nondestructive DNA sampling from freshwater pearl mussels Margaritifera margaritifera L. (Bivalvia:Unionoida)

[SECTION] abstract
Nondestructive tissue sampling is desirable for genetic or physiological studies of endangered freshwater mussels. We used the freshwater pearl mussel (Margaritifera margaritifera) to evaluate 4 sampling methods (haemolymph extraction, foot scraping, mantle biopsy, and viscera swabbing) with regard to their effectiveness for deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) analyses and their effects on sampled mussels. One hundred twenty-eight days subsequent to tissue sampling (1 June-7 October), all sampled individuals were alive, and average growth of sampled individuals was not significantly different from unsampled, control individuals, except that the viscera-swabbing group had lower growth. The magnitude of decreased growth in viscera-swabbed individuals was small (,0.5 mm less than controls), and the biological significance of this result is unclear. DNA yields from haemolymph extraction and foot scraping were significantly lower and more variable than yields from the other methods. Genotyping success was lowest for haemolymph extraction and mantle biopsy, but was high for the other methods. Viscera-swab samples stored in lysis buffer at room temperature prior to DNA extraction had higher DNA yield than samples stored in buffer at 4uC or samples stored dry, but genotyping success was equivalent among storage methods. On the basis of these results, we recommend use of the noninvasive viscera-swabbing method.

[SECTION] (no title)
The freshwater pearl mussel (Margaritifera margaritifera) is listed as endangered by the IUCN (2011). Therefore, nondestructive tissue sampling is desirable for studying the genetics or physiology of this and other imperiled species. At least 4 nondestructive methods have been used for freshwater mussels. Clipping a small piece of mantle tissue (mantle biopsy) is effective for obtaining tissue for genetic and biochemical analyses and does not result in short-term mortality (Berg et al. 1995). However, mantle biopsy is an invasive method that can lead to deformities and possibly to long-term mortality. Swabbing or scraping of the viscera or the foot has been recommended as an alternative, noninvasive method (Henley et al. 2006). In most genetic studies of the freshwater pearl mussel, investigators have used extraction of haemolymph for deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) sampling (Geist and Kuehn 2005, 2008, Geist et al. 2010, Cauwelier et al. 2012). Although regarded as nondestructive, extraction of haemolymph is invasive and may harm or kill the animal if done inappropriately.
The goal of our study was to evaluate 4 methods of tissue sampling with regard to their effectiveness for DNA analyses and their effects on sampled mussels: 1) haemolymph extraction, 2) foot scraping, 3) mantle biopsy, and 4) viscera swabbing. In addition, we evaluated 3 methods of sample storage for viscera swabs. We used comparisons of DNA yield, DNA quality, and genotyping scoring rates from a PCR multiplex of 4 microsatellite loci as the basis of our evaluation. We assessed effects on mussels based on comparison of survival and growth of sampled individuals among methods.

[SECTION] field methods and tissue collection
We sampled tissues from freshwater pearl mussels in the field at the River Borra ˚selva, in central Norway (lat 63u32 9 37 0 N, long 11u2 9 10 0 E). Average shell length of sampled individuals was 93.0 mm (range = 77.5-111.9 mm). We sampled 15 individuals for each tissue-sampling method and included a control group of 15 unsampled individuals. We measured initial shell length of all individuals to the nearest 0.1 mm with a slide caliper. We extracted haemolymph from the foot with a 21-gauge 3 3.8-cm sterile needle inserted between the closed valves (sample volume = 250-350 mL; Geist and Kuehn 2005). For the remaining 3 methods, we removed mussels from the water and left them undisturbed until the adductor muscles relaxed. Then we carefully held the shell open with pliers and a finger. We handled the control group in the same way, but did not collect tissue samples.
We used a scalpel to scrape mucus and superficial cell tissue from the foot. We biopsied the mantle by removing a small piece (5-10 mm 2 ) of the outer part of the mantle with a scalpel. We placed foot-scraping and mantle biopsy samples in 96% ethanol. We used cotton swabs to collect material from the outer surface of the visceral mass.
We took 3 visceral swabs from each individual. We put 1 sample in a paper envelope and allowed it to air dry. We stored the 2 nd and 3 rd samples in separate tubes with 600 mL of lysis buffer (E.Z.N.A. TM ; Omega Bio-Tek Inc., Norcross, Georgia). We completed extractions from the dry-stored swab samples 1 wk after field collection. We kept 1 of the swab samples stored in lysis buffer at room temperature for 2 wk and the other at 4uC for 1 wk before DNA extraction. The rationale for evaluating 3 storage procedures for the visceral swabs was to evaluate effects on degradation of DNA and differences in DNA yield resulting from differences in the amount of tissue material dissolved from the swab into the lysis buffer. We chose storage methods based on what we consider to be common practice depending on the type of sampling method. Thus, we did not store visceral swabs in ethanol because doing so would have required extra laboratory work to remove the ethanol and dissolve the tissue material from the swab prior to DNA extraction. Because we took the 3 samples for each storage technique from the same individuals, these samples are not strictly independent, but we used this sampling design to reduce the effect on this population because of its endangered status.
After tissue collection, we marked all sampled mussels individually by engraving numbers on their shells and distributed them in 3 cages buried in the stream bottom to assess growth and survival. Each cage was 42 3 42 3 15 cm and had a perforated steel plate on the front side (facing upstream) and the bottom, and 2.5-cm steel mesh on the top. The side walls and the wall facing downstream were closed (not perforated). We buried cages half way into the stream bottom and filled them with substrate to the level of the outside substrate. We placed cages in water ranging from 30 to 40 cm deep and ,80 cm apart so that they did not affect one another's water current.
We collected tissue samples on 1 June 2011 and monitored growth and survival for 128 d thereafter (until 7 October 2011). Inspection of the cages on 1 July, 3 August, and 4 September (without disturbing the mussels) revealed no mortality and that the mussels were naturally positioned in the substrate. At termination of the experiment, we recorded survival and shell length of all individuals. We tested for differences in growth between the sampled groups and the control group with analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) with final shell length as the dependent variable and initial shell length as the covariate (SPSS, version 19.0; IBM Group, Armonk, New York). We adjusted significance of comparisons between group means with sequential Bonferroni correction (Rice 1989).

[SECTION] dna analysis
We centrifuged haemolymph samples at 17,700 g for 10 min, discarded the supernatant, and dried the remaining pellet 1 h at 37uC. We dried samples from foot scraping and mantle biopsy to remove ethanol. We extracted total genomic DNA from haemolymph, foot-scraping, and mantle biopsy samples with the E.Z.N.A. tissue DNA kit following the protocol for isolation of total DNA from animal tissue. We eluted DNA with 200 mL of elution buffer. We extracted DNA from visceral swab samples with the E.Z.N.A. MicroElute Genomic DNA kit following the protocol for isolation of genomic DNA from cotton swabs. We eluted DNA from all viscera swab samples with 75 mL of elution buffer.
We measured DNA with a NanoDrop 1000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts), and we assessed possible degradation (fragmentation) of DNA quality by agarose gel electrophoresis (1% agarose, 13 TAE buffer, 4.67 volt/cm, Gelred TM stain, loading 125 ng of 1 kb DNA ladder). For comparison of DNA yields, we accounted for the difference in volume of elution buffer used for viscera samples (75 mL) and for the other samples (200 mL) by multiplying the concentrations from the viscera samples by the 75:200 ratio and by diluting the viscera samples to the corresponding elution volume used for the other samples (200 mL) when estimating DNA concentrations and when loading DNA on the agarose gel. We tested for differences in DNA yield among methods with analysis of variance (ANOVA) and sequential Bonferroni correction for multiple tests (Rice 1989). The quality of the DNA was further assessed by genotyping with a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) multiplex with the following loci: MarMa3050, MarMa3621, MarMa4322, and MarMa4726 (Geist et al. 2003). We carried out the multiplex reactions in a total volume of 10 mL containing 4.2 mM of total primers, 0.8 mM of each dNTP, 13 reaction buffer containing 15 mM MgCl, and 1 unit of Hotstar polymerase (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). We added 30 ng (2 mL) of template DNA from each sample to the PCR mix. We adjusted concentrations to 15 ng/mL for all samples, except for 2 samples of haemolymph and 3 foot-scraping samples, for which the DNA concentrations initially were ,15 ng/ml (range = 7.4-11.5). We ran the following PCR program on a Quattro Cycler (VWR, Radnor, Pennsylvania): denaturation for 15 min at 95uC, 30 cycles of denaturation at 94uC for 30 s, annealing at 55uC for 30 s, extension at 72uC for 45 s, and a final extension at 72uC for 10 min. We separated fragments from each multiplex, visualized them separately on an ABI 3130xl DNA analyzer, and sized them using GeneMapper (version 3.7; Applied Biosystems, Foster City, California).

[SECTION] results
All sampled and control individuals were alive and naturally positioned in the substrate after 128 d. All sampled and control individuals showed positive growth except for 4 swab-sampled individuals that had slightly negative growth-increment values (Table 1). Growth did not differ significantly between the sampled and the control groups (p = 0.618-0.981) except for the swab-sampled group, for which the mean growth increment was significantly lower than that of the control group (p = 0.01). However, the range of growth increments among swabbed individuals overlapped widely with values from other sampling methods and the control group.
DNA yield varied among sampling methods (Table 2). The lowest mean DNA yields were obtained from foot scraping and haemolymph. Yields from these methods were significantly lower than yields from mantle biopsy and all viscera swabbing methods, except that the comparison between haemolymph and cold-stored tissue swab samples did not differ significantly. The highest DNA yields were from mantle biopsy and room-temperature-stored viscera swabs, and mean yield did not differ significantly between these groups. Among storage methods for viscera swabs, room-temperature storage yielded significantly more DNA than cold storage or dry storage. The lower DNA yield from haemolymph and foot scraping also was evident on agarose gels, where these methods produced generally weak but highly variable signals with a large proportion of the samples almost lacking DNA (Fig. 1).
In addition to their low DNA yield, haemolymph samples had consistently low genotyping success (Table 3). Four specimens were not successfully genotyped at any locus, and only 9 specimens were successfully genotyped at all 4 loci. Mantle biopsy also produced low genotyping success. One specimen was not successfully genotyped at any locus, and only 6 specimens were successfully genotyped at all 4 loci. Genotyping success was consistently high for the other methods. Successful genotyping at all 4 loci was obtained for 14 foot-scraping samples, 15 cold-stored viscera-swab samples, 15 room-temperature-stored viscera-swab samples, and 14 dry-stored viscera-swab samples. Scoring rates for each microsatellite locus across all samples ranged from 0.84 to 0.92. All sampling and storage methods yielded DNA with high molecular weight and relatively little fragmented DNA (Fig. 1).

[SECTION] discussion
All 4 sampling methods appeared to be nondestructive and suitable for sampling DNA from freshwater mussels, particularly endangered species. Short-term survival was high for all methods, and most methods did not appear to affect growth negatively compared to control individuals. However, growth was significantly lower in individuals sampled by viscera swabbing than in individuals sampled by other methods. One explanation for this result is that we took 3 swab samples from each individual to evaluate different sample storage methods. Taking only 1 sample from an individual might reduce stress

[SECTION] 528
S. KARLSSON ET AL.
[Volume 32
This content downloaded from 176.143.176.17 on Sun, 25 May 2025 13:44:33 UTC All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms and resulting effects on growth. Furthermore, the biological and conservation significance of this result is unclear for 2 reasons. First, the growth rate of adult pearl mussels is very low naturally, and the apparent low growth, or even negative growth, of swabbed individuals could have been an artifact of low precision in accurately measuring very small growth increments. Second, the magnitude of apparent growth reductions associated with viscera swabbing was extremely small (,0.5 mm less than for control individuals). Similarly small, but statistically significant reductions in growth are caused by even brief handling of mussels (without DNA sampling). Although repeated handling could result in an accrual of these effects, 1-time handling was not considered a threat to long-term mussel survivorship or fitness by Haag and Commens-Carson (2008). For long-lived, slow-growing pearl mussels, we think that small, 1time reductions in growth caused by DNA sampling are unlikely to be harmful, but we caution that it would be prudent to refrain from sampling single individuals repeatedly. Further studies of the effects of DNA sampling on long-term survival and sublethal effects, particularly related to reproduction, are desirable.
Our results for DNA yield and genotyping success provide clear recommendations for the choice of DNA sampling methods for mussels. Viscera swabbing was the best method on the basis of its high DNA yield and consistently high genotyping success, whereas extraction of haemolymph and foot scraping were the least useful and reliable methods. The highest DNA yield was obtained from mantle biopsy, but the genotyping success of this method was poor. Optimization of the DNA extraction protocol from biopsy samples might possibly improve genotyping success. However, the procedure is invasive, and even though we did not demonstrate any lethal or sublethal effects from mantle clipping, we recommend this method be avoided if possible. Storage of viscera-swab samples in lysis buffer at room temperature prior to extraction provided the highest DNA yield. We did not test the effect of storage time on DNA yield or quality, and cold storage might be necessary when samples are stored for longer periods. However, when samples can be analyzed within 2 wk, room-temperature storage clearly was preferable to cold storage. Several methods of nondestructive DNA sampling have been applied successfully in the Margaritiferidae and Unionidae. These methods include extraction of haemolymph (Geist and Kuehn 2005), viscera swabbing (Moyer and Dı ´az-Ferguson 2012), and mantle biopsy (Moyer andWilliams 2011, Moyer andDı ´az-Ferguson 2012). However, few investigators have evaluated lethal effects (Berg et al. 1995) or DNA yield (Henley et al. 2006) from these methods, and none have examined sublethal effects or DNA quality. Despite potential negative effects on growth, we agree with Henley et al. (2006) in recommending viscera swabbing for tissue collection. In addition to high DNA yield, this method was nonlethal, resulted in high genotyping success, and was easy to perform quickly in the field. We recommend taking only 1 sample from an individual to minimize stress and, when samples can be processed soon after collection, storage in lysis buffer at room temperature. We did not study all possible combinations of sampling techniques, storage methods, and DNA extraction procedures, and other extraction protocols or storage methods may provide reliable results. Our methods are probably applicable to a wide variety of mussel species other than the freshwater pearl mussel (e.g., see Henley et al. 2006), but interspecific differences should not be ruled out. Nevertheless, viscera swabbing represents a cost-effective, reliable technique that is noninvasive and has low potential to cause lasting harm to freshwater mussels.
====================================================================================================
FILE: Discovery of 20,000 RAD-SNPs and development of a 52-SNP array for monitoring river otters.grobid.tei (1).xml
====================================================================================================

[SECTION] title
Discovery of 20,000 RAD-SNPs and development of a 52-SNP array for monitoring river otters

[SECTION] abstract
Many North American river otter (Lontra canadensis) populations are threatened or recovering but are difficult to study because they occur at low densities, it is difficult to visually identify individuals, and they inhabit aquatic environments that accelerate degradation of biological samples. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) can improve our ability to monitor demographic and genetic parameters of difficult to study species. We used restriction site associated DNA (RAD) sequencing to discover 20,772 SNPs present in Montana, USA, river otter populations, including 14,512 loci that were also variable in at least one other population range-wide. After applying careful filtering criteria meant to minimize ascertainment bias and identify high quality, highly heterozygous (H o = 0.2-0.50) SNPs, we developed and tested 52 independent SNP qPCR genotyping assays, including 41 that performed well with diluted DNA. The 41 loci provided high power for population assignment tests with only 1 misassignment (1.6 %) between closely neighboring populations. Our SNPs showed high power to differentiate individuals and assign them to population of origin, as well as strong concordance of genotypes from high and diluted concentrations of DNA, and between original RAD and the SNP qPCR array.

[SECTION] (no title)
Like other wide-ranging, elusive species, monitoring river otter populations remains a challenge for management agencies (Melquist et al. 2003). Individual otters are difficult to distinguish visually and are known to travel considerable distances (Melquist and Hornocker 1983;Newton 2012). Radio-tagging studies, which require surgically implanting transmitters, are expensive and logistically difficult, and typically produce small samples sizes. For these and other reasons, studies aimed at estimating abundance, population growth rates, and connectivity have been difficult.
Interest in ensuring long-term population persistence in the face of harvest and habitat loss has led to the development of molecular tools, primarily microsatellite markers, to monitor otter population dynamics (e.g., Mowry et al. 2011). Advancements in discovery and genotyping of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), with concurrent reduction in costs, present an opportunity to vastly improve our ability to monitor wildlife populations. Relative to microsatellites, SNPs are less prone to genotyping errors, easier to transfer and analyze consistently among laboratories, genotyping samples is faster and cheaper, and SNPs can include neutral markers or those linked to regions under selection (Morin et al. 2004;Allendorf et al. 2010;Helyar et al. 2011;Fabbri et al. 2012).
One of the strengths of using genetic methods for monitoring river otter populations is the ease of collecting fecal samples from shared latrine sites along water bodies. Latrines are easy to locate and provide an opportunity to collect fecal material from multiple individuals at one site. Likely because of degradation of DNA due to moisture and ultraviolet light (Vynne et al. 2011;Stetz et al. 2015), these efforts have been largely unsuccessful due to poor genotyping success rates. For example, a study in Montana was able to obtain complete multilocus genotypes for just 6 % of otter scat samples using microsatellites (Newton 2012). As SNPs are considerably shorter than microsatellites, higher genotyping success rates (i.e., lower rates of allelic drop out and false amplifications) are likely, even with poor quality samples such as scat (Morin and McCarthy 2007;Fabbri et al. 2012;Fitak et al. 2015). We therefore set out to develop a SNP array for river otters that would improve our ability to assess and monitor otter populations in Montana and across the species' range.
Although our emphasis was on otter populations in Montana, we used muscle tissue samples from a large geographic area to minimize issues of ascertainment bias and to ensure usefulness range-wide (Fig. 1; Allendorf et al. 2010). Sampling two populations that are somewhat close geographically (i.e., NB and QE) strengthened our test of marker power to assign individuals to population of origin.
DNA was extracted from tissue samples using the Qiagen DNeasy protocol then quantified using the Quant-iT TM PicoGreen Ò dsDNA assay to ensure DNA concentrations [5 ng/ll, needed for producing restriction-site-associated (RAD) sequencing libraries (Etter et al. 2011). RAD libraries were sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq 2000 platform using 150 base pair paired-end reads.
Following Amish et al. (2012), we selected for informative loci while applying strict data quality and assay design filters. Samples were excluded from downstream analysis if [ 50 % of their genotyped loci had \5 reads or [fivefold read count difference between alleles. To facilitate SNP PCR genotyping assay design SNP loci had to be located between 40-70 nucleotides from the end, and we allowed only 1 SNP per RAD locus to avoid RAD loci assembled from paralogs and to avoid physically linked SNPs. We then excluded RAD loci where C2 samples had \5 reads or [fivefold read count difference between 2 alleles. We also required that observed heterozygosity (both range-wide and within Montana) be 0.2-0.6, that C1 sample from outside Montana was heterozygous at each RAD locus, and that each locus was successfully genotyped in [80 % of Montana samples.
These criteria produced 100 candidate SNPs, from which we selected the 96 with the highest expected heterozygosity for KASP-by-Design Fluidigm Assays (LGC Genomics Ò ). We tested these 96 assays on 73 samples from across otter range on a Fluidigm microfluidic SNP-chip. After excluding 7 loci due to high linkage disequilibrium (p \ 0.01), we identified 52 loci in Hardy-Weinberg proportions, with expected and observed heterozygosity [0.2 for Montana samples, and with B1 instance where the initial RAD genotype did not match the SNP-chip genotype (Table S1). Within SNP-chip genotypes, each sample was run at least three times, and there could be B1 instance of replicate genotypes not matching. We next required that each of the three possible genotypes from each locus was observed at least once on each of 2 SNP-chips. We set a call rate threshold of 90 % for each SNP-chip (i.e., 90 % of individuals and replicates yielded quality genotypes), and mean genotype confidence had to be [90 % for both chips.
We then identified a subset of 41 loci for use with low quantity DNA samples by testing loci on samples where we reduced the original DNA concentration (C50 ng/ll) by half (Table S1). We excluded loci where C1 instance of normal and low concentration genotypes did not match, and where B1 instance of low concentration duplicate genotypes did not match.
We used probability of identity statistics and population assignment tests to examine the SNP panel's power to answer questions of sample identity or population of origin. We used GenAlEx 6.5 (Peakall and Smouse 2006) to calculate probability of identity, and Geneclass 2.0 (Piry et al. 2004;Rannala and Mountain 1997) to test how well individual otters assigned to populations (Paetkau et al. 1995) using our two classes of SNPs. Both sets of loci showed acceptable power to differentiate even closely related individuals within and among populations (Fig. 1). Using 52 loci produced 3 misassignments (5.1 %) compared to just 1 observed in the reduced set of 41 loci (1.6 %). All 3 putatively misassigned samples, however, originated in the closest neighboring population. For example, the 2 individuals from New Brunswick that assigned to Quebec had 46-49 % assignment scores to their native region, suggesting that these may have been related to recent migration events.
The SNPs we report here represent a new tool for monitoring demographic and genetic status and changes in river otter populations across North America. SNPs may be particularly well suited to studying otter populations given the observed increase in genotyping success of fecal samples relative to microsatellite markers in other species (e.g., Campbell and Narum 2009;Fabbri et al. 2012;Fitak et al. 2015). Further, this SNP array may be a powerful tool to explore genetic structure and evolutionary potential of otter populations while taking advantage of noninvasive sampling techniques. Such information is particularly valuable for reintroduction efforts and general questions on river otter ecology. Necessary next steps include optimizing sampling and preservation methods to maximize SNP performance in spraints, and to directly compare performance of SNPs to microsatellites.

