[SECTION] title
SEE PROFILE

[SECTION] abstract
The control of foxes (Vulpes vulpes) is a key component of many fauna recovery programs in Australia. A question crucial to the success of these programs is how fox control influences feral cat abundance and subsequently affects predation upon native fauna. Historically, this question has been difficult to address because invasive predators are typically challenging to monitor. Here, non-invasive DNA analysis was used to determine the fate of radio-collared woylies (Bettongia penicillata) in two reserves in a mesic environment where foxes had been controlled intensively for over two decades. Woylie trap success had increased more than 20-fold after fox baiting commenced in the 1980s but decreased precipitously in 2000. Ninety-eight monitored woylies were killed between 2006 and 2009. DNA analysis of swabs taken from radio-collars and carcasses of these woylies indicated that predation by cats (Felis catus) caused most mortalities (65%) and was three times the fox predation rate (21%). Also, indices of cat abundance were higher in fox-baited sites where foxes were less abundant. Predation on woylies by cats was greater than previously recognised and, by implication, may significantly reduce the effectiveness of fox control programs throughout Australia. Integrated fox and cat control is essential to ensure the success of fauna recovery programs.

[SECTION] introduction
Australia has the highest rate of mammalian decline and extinction in the world (Short and Smith 1994). Many of these declines coincided with the introduction of the European fox (Vulpes vulpes) and its colonisation of the southern half of the continent in the mid-late 19th century and early 20th century (Jarman 1986). Due to this and other evidence, fox predation is now recognised to be a major factor in faunal declines and it is accepted nationally as a key threatening process (DEWHA 2008a).
Fox control is an important component of most fauna conservation programs in Australia (Saunders and McLeod 2007). The most effective and widely deployed method of fox control is the delivery of meat baits containing the naturally occurring toxin 1080 (sodium fluoroacetate) (Thomson and Algar 2000;Saunders and McLeod 2007). The regular delivery of 1080 baits has resulted in some significant recoveries of threatened mammals. In Western Australia, where baiting commenced in the early 1980s, these recoveries include numbats (Myrmecobius fasciatus: Myrmecobiidae) (Friend 1990), rock wallabies (Petrogale lateralis: Macropodidae) (Kinnear et al. 1988(Kinnear et al. , 1998(Kinnear et al. , 2010) ) and woylies (Bettongia penicillata: Macropodidae) (Kinnear et al. 2002). By 1996 fox control in Western Australia had been so effective that three species, the woylie, the tammar wallaby (Macropus eugenii) and the quenda (Isoodon obesulus), were removed from the State's threatened species list (Mawson 2004). In that year the area baited for fox control was expanded to ~3.5 million hectares when Australia's first large-scale fox-control program, the Western Shield fauna recovery program, was initiated (Possingham et al. 2004). Since then other large-scale fox-baiting programs have commenced within Australia; these include Southern Ark and Glenelg Ark in Victoria (DEPI 2014a(DEPI , 2014b) ) and Operation Bounceback in South Australia (DEWNR 2014). Numerous smaller-scale foxcontrol programs that employ repeated baiting to reduce fox abundance for both conservation and agricultural purposes have also been established (Saunders and McLeod 2007).
Predation by feral cats is also recognised as a key threatening process in Australian ecosystems (Dickman 1996a;DEWHA 2008b). Cats were introduced to Australia in the early 1800s and have colonised virtually the entire continent and all terrestrial habitats (Abbott 2002). Historically, the threat posed to native fauna by cats has been considered to be less than that of foxes, and was thought to be greater in arid rather than in mesic regions (Dickman 1996b;Burrows et al. 2003;Possingham et al. 2004;McKenzie et al. 2007). There is little evidence that cat predation had a major role in the widespread mammal declines observed in mesic environments during the 19th and early 20th centuries (Abbott 2002). Also, the fauna recoveries observed in the southwest following the introduction of fox baiting in the 1980s occurred irrespective of the presence of cats (Burrows et al. 2003).
Studies of the interactions between foxes and cats indicate that cats are generally subordinate to foxes and that competitive (exploitative or interference) and predatory (i.e. intraguild predation) interactions occur (Brunner et al. 1991;Christensen and Burrows 1995;Molsher 1999;Short et al. 1999;Risbey et al. 2000;Robley et al. 2004). Conceivably, when foxes and cats occur sympatrically the presence of foxes may limit the capacity of cats to prey upon native fauna. Conversely, when foxes are controlled this could lead to both increases in abundance and changes in behaviour of cats (Christensen and Burrows 1995;Risbey et al. 2000;Newsome and Ripple 2014). Such an effect has the potential to limit the gains to fauna recovery achieved by controlling the initial target, the fox (Letnic et al. 2009). This outcome would be highly significant for fauna management in Australia because of the vast scale over which fox control is deployed. However, there have been few investigations of the impacts of fox baiting on cat abundance, behaviour, and predation on native fauna, which reflects the difficulties of monitoring the population dynamics of these predators (Robley et al. 2004).
One of the longest-standing fox-baiting programs in Australia for the purposes of biodiversity conservation has been undertaken at Dryandra Woodland and Tutanning Nature Reserve in the south-west of Western Australia. Here the changing status of the woylie, a small macropodid (750-1850 g), exemplifies the positive impacts of 1080 baiting for native fauna recovery but also raises questions about the long-term effectiveness of fox baiting and the net outcome for wildlife conservation.
The woylie occupied much of the southern half of Australia until the late 19th and early 20th centuries (de Tores and Start 2008) but its distribution contracted by >99%, largely coinciding with the arrival of the fox (Jarman 1986;Abbott 2002;Short et al. 2005). By the early 1970s only three relictual populations of woylies remained, and two of these were in Dryandra Woodland and Tutanning Nature Reserve (Sampson 1971). By the late 1970s these populations were greatly reduced, with trap success declining to virtually zero (Kinnear et al. 2002). Woylies were listed in 1973 as 'rare or likely to become extinct' under the Wildlife Conservation Act (Groom 2010).
Following the introduction of fox baiting in Dryandra Woodland and Tutanning Nature Reserve the trap success of woylies increased more than 20-fold and was sustained for more than 10 years (Fig. 1). However, although the fox-baiting regime remained unchanged, woylie trap success in these two areas declined sharply in 2000, and by 2002 had returned to prebaiting levels. Woylies were relisted by the Western Australian Government in 2008 and were also listed as 'Endangered' (under the EPBC Act) by the Federal Australian Government in 2009 (Wayne et al. 2013).
Three main hypotheses for the collapse in woylie abundance have been proposed: (1) replacement of foxes by other predators such as feral cats (Felis catus) or native predators such as chuditch (Dasyurus geoffroii), pythons (Morelia spilota), or wedge-tailed eagles (Aquila audax) in the presence of effective fox control;
(2) reduced effectiveness of fox control due to reduced palatability or availability of fox baits or to decreased availability or effectiveness of the toxin 1080; or (3) the effects of disease. Here, we focus on examining the evidence to determine whether the predation hypothesis is supported (i.e. Hypothesis 1) because the fox-baiting regime was found to effectively reduce fox abundance (N. Marlow, unpubl. data) and the role of disease has been explored elsewhere (Wayne et al. 2014;Pacioni et al. 2014). We use novel non-invasive DNA analysis to determine the fate of monitored woylies in Dryandra Woodland and Tutanning Nature Reserve where foxes have been baited intensively with 1080 poison for two decades. The abundances of foxes and cats in these reserves were also compared with those in unbaited sites using DNA analysis techniques.

[SECTION] study sites
Fieldwork was conducted between April 2006 and October 2009. Four study sites were situated in the Wheatbelt region of Western Australia: two sites baited with 1080 poison (Dryandra Woodland and Tutanning Nature Reserve) and two unbaited sites (Quinn's block and Highbury block) (Fig. 2). Vegetation in the sites comprised open woodland dominated by wandoo (Eucalyptus wandoo) and powder-bark wandoo (E. accedens), with dense thickets of rock she-oak (Allocasuarina huegeliana), poison peas (Gastrolobium spp.), and low dense heathlands and brown mallet (E. astringens). Annual rainfall is 500-600 mm. Land clearing, mainly during the last 50 years, has reduced the area of native bushland to isolated remnants.
The main block of Dryandra Woodland is a 12 000-ha remnant 25 km north-west of Narrogin. The Woodland lies close to the boundary between the Mallee and Avon Wheatbelt biogeographic regions of the South-west Botanical Province. The study site within this block is a central area of 6800 ha (Fig. 2). Tutanning Nature Reserve is a small (2000 ha) reserve ~50 km to the north-east of Dryandra Woodland. It is in the Avon Wheatbelt biogeographic region of the South-west Botanical Province.

[SECTION] fox-control regime
Dryandra Woodland and Tutanning Nature Reserve were handbaited every 4 weeks (13 times per year) with fox baits containing 3 mg 1080 at the standard baiting rate of 5 baits km -2 (Thomson and Algar 2000;Orell 2004). Dried meat baits obtained from the Department of Agriculture and Food were used at both sites until August 2008 when the use of Pro-baits (Armstrong 2004;Marlow et al. 2014a) commenced in Dryandra Woodland.

[SECTION] monitoring woylie populations
A sample of ~20 woylies fitted with telemetry transmitter collars was maintained in both Dryandra Woodland and Tutanning Nature Reserve from April 2006 to October 2009. Woylies were trapped in Sheffield cage traps (Sheffield Wire Products, Welshpool, WA) baited with rolled oats, peanut butter and sardines. Individuals were weighed, sexed, ear-tagged and pittagged with a passive transponder (Allflex Australia Pty Ltd, Capalaba, Qld). The condition of woylies was assessed qualitatively and any visible evidence of ill-health or poor condition was recorded. Woylies were fitted with Biotrack TW-5 (Biotrack, UK) mortality-sensing radio-collars. The status of each radio-collared woylie (active or mortality mode) was monitored once a day for five days each week.

[SECTION] identifying the cause of woylie mortality
When a mortality event occurred the carcass of the woylie was photographed in situ and collected. Its general condition was examined and any signs of predation were recorded. The scene was examined closely to maximise the collection of any evidence relating to the cause of the woylie's death. Radio-collars and wounds of dead woylies were swabbed with a standard cotton bud moistened with purified water to collect any body fluids deposited by predators. Care was taken to avoid contamination between samples. Swabs taken outside the laboratory were stored refrigerated and transported to the laboratory within three days. DNA from the top 0.5 cm of saliva swabs was extracted immediately upon arrival at the laboratory using a Qiagen  DNeasy tissue kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA) (Glen et al. 2010;Berry et al. 2012). All DNA analysis was conducted in a laboratory dedicated to trace DNA samples. No concentrated DNA samples or polymerase chain reaction (PCR) products entered this laboratory and surfaces were routinely subjected to ultraviolet sterilisation. All pipetting was completed with aerosolresistant tips. PCR and DNA extraction controls were included in all analyses. Melt-curve analysis based on quantitative PCR amplification of species-diagnostic mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) fragments was used to identify predator DNA on swabs (Berry and Sarre 2007). This assay distinguished fox, cat and chuditch samples. Positive controls for all species were included in the analysis and all PCR setup was conducted in a sterile isolation chamber.
If insufficient DNA was obtained from a woylie carcass to enable the predator to be identified, predation characteristics were examined and a qualitative assessment of the responsible species was made. The extent of collar distortion and the size and distance between tooth marks were used to differentiate between fox and cat predation (James et al. 2002). Raptor predation was assumed if no fox, cat or chuditch DNA was obtained and if woylie fur had been plucked and/or its skin turned inside out, or if the collar was located in a raptor nest. Predation by pythons was determined if the transmitter signal emanated from one of these reptiles.
Microsatellite DNA genotyping was used to identify individual cats from swabs that returned positive melt curve analysis results for the presence of cat DNA (n = 59). This analysis was conducted by EcoGene in New Zealand. Samples were genotyped with a panel of nine microsatellite DNA markers and a gender-identifying sequence-tagged site from the Y-chromosome SRY gene (Menotti-Raymond et al. 2005). Error checking and correction were conducted as described in Menotti-Raymond et al. (2005). In addition, consensus genotypes were screened for one and two allele mismatches with the program Genecap (Wilberg and Dreher 2004). Such mismatches are typical of genotyping error rather than true differences between individuals (Paetkau 2004). Where one and two allele mismatches were identified, original genotypes were rechecked for compatibility with allelic dropout and adjusted by reinstating the missing allele(s). Microsatellite DNA genotyping was also used to identify individual foxes and their sex from swabs that returned positive melt curve results for the presence of fox DNA. This analysis was conducted according to the methods described in Berry et al. (2012Berry et al. ( , 2014)), and was based on six replicate genotypes for each swab sample.

[SECTION] estimating fox density and the relative abundance of cats
The presence of foxes and cats was monitored at sand-plots constructed in all four study sites at 500-m intervals along all roads (Fig. 3a-c). Sand-plots were constructed by removing 8-10 cm of the track surface and replacing the extracted material with clean fine sand. Each plot was ~1 m wide and extended across the track. In all, 129 sand-plots were positioned in Dryandra Woodland, 75 in Tutanning Nature Reserve, 31 in Quinn's block and 32 in Highbury block. Sand-plots were monitored for three consecutive nights every three months from May 2008 to August 2009.
Individual foxes were identified from hair samples collected at every second sand-plot. Hair samples were obtained when foxes were enticed to pass between three semi-vertical sticks, each with double sided tape adhered to it (Berry et al. 2012). Microsatellite DNA genotypes were obtained from the hair samples according to the methods described in Berry et al. (2012). Abundance estimates for foxes were obtained by converting the repeated detection of individual foxes into an encounter history and analysing these using a capture-recapture framework. The robust design model with closed captures within the Program MARK analysis package (White 2001) was used in these analyses (N. Marlow, unpubl. data). Too few cat hair samples were obtained to permit capturerecapture analysis. Instead, a standard activity index (Allen et al. 1996), and a modified activity index that accounted for the distance typically travelled by cats, were employed. The modified index separated cat tracks observed on the sand-plot arrays into groups considered to represent unique individuals. Sets of tracks were assigned to different cats if their distance apart exceeded the mean distance between consecutive instances of woylie predation by known cats. The index was interpreted as indicating the minimum number of cats responsible for the observed pattern of tracks (I KTBA ). The comprehensive networks of tracks within the reserves increased the likelihood of a cat encountering a sand-plot even though cats are less likely to follow tracks than foxes (Mahon et al. 1998;Edwards et al. 2000). To minimise the potential bias associated with individuals moving on and off the study area between sampling periods, the largest reserves available were selected so that the average cat's home-range area was small compared with that of the study sites (Forsyth et al. 2005).

[SECTION] results
In total, 252 adult woylies were captured at Dryandra Woodland and Tutanning Nature Reserve (Table 1) and 146 were radiocollared and monitored. The average number of radio-collared woylies maintained in Dryandra Woodland and Tutanning Nature Reserve was 22.3 (AE3.2 sd) and 19.6 (AE3.4 sd) respectively. Ninety-eight radio-collared woylies died (48 in Dryandra Woodland and 50 in Tutanning Nature Reserve) and eight went missing. Woylies were generally observed to be in good condition, had few ectoparasites, and had no obvious evidence of disease. All remaining radio-collars (n = 40) were removed from the collared woylies in November 2009.
The radio-collars and wounds of 91 dead woylies were swabbed to obtain predator saliva and DNA samples. Seven collars were not swabbed because four had been eaten by pythons and three were from woylies concluded to have been killed by wedge-tailed eagles (e.g. collars found in nests). The carcasses of 96 woylies were located within 2.3 (AE1.7, s.d.) days of the animal's death. Two woylie carcasses remained unrecovered for 13 and 54 days, respectively.
The predominant cause of woylie death (65%) was cat predation (Table 2). Fox predation accounted for a further 21% of woylie deaths. One woylie was killed by a chuditch. The predators of 14 woylies could not be identified through DNA analyses and so predation characteristics were used. Predation was determined to be the cause of all woylie mortalities because bruising occurred around tooth/ puncture marks and this precluded scavenging after death.

[SECTION] identification of individual cat and fox predators
Twenty-three genotypes consisting of seven or eight microsatellite DNA loci were obtained from the samples of feline origin. These corresponded to 18 individual cats. The eight-locus probability of identity for the marker panel was 4.24 Â 10 À11 , and the probability of two full siblings having an identical genotype (PID (sibling) ; Waits et al. 2001) was 3.1 Â 10 À4 . Seventeen (94%) of the individuals identified were males. One cat killed three radio-collared woylies, and three cats each killed two woylies. The average weight of woylies killed by cats was 1105 g (range 704-1497 g) and the woylie killed by the female cat weighed 1323 g. The genotypes of six individual foxes that had killed woylies were obtained, all were males and none killed more than one of the monitored woylies. The average weight of woylies killed by foxes was 1094 g (range 446-1429 g).

[SECTION] estimates of fox and cat abundance
The activity index of cats and modified index (I KTBA ) were substantially higher in fox-baited sites than in unbaited sites (Fig. 4). The distance used to differentiate the tracks of individual cats for the I KTBA (i.e. the mean distance between woylie predations by known cats) was 1002 m (range 97-3709 m, n = 15). The only cat track observed in an unbaited site in any session was detected in November 2008 when one individual sand-plot was visited in Quinn's block. Foxes were significantly more abundant in the unbaited sites than in the baited sites (Fig. 4).

[SECTION] discussion
Baiting with 1080 poison is the most effective method of fox control and is the mainstay of conservation programs that are carried out over vast areas within Australia (Armstrong 2004;Saunders and McLeod 2007;DEPI 2014aDEPI , 2014b;;DEWNR 2014). Despite ongoing fox control in Western Australia some species of threatened fauna have declined in abundance in the past 10 years (Orell 2004). Our results show that feral cats increased in abundance in two reserves where intensive fox baiting had been sustained and that their predatory impact was sufficient to threaten the persistence of woylies, an iconic native mammal. We identify that increased cat abundance and predation are the unintentional consequences of prolonged fox baiting.

[SECTION] predation on woylies
The greatest cause of woylie mortality in fox-baited sites was predation by cats. Three times more woylies were killed by cats than by foxes and some individual cats were responsible for multiple predations. One cat killed at least three woylies and another three cats each killed two woylies. These results are highly noteworthy because they were obtained from Dryandra Woodland and Tutanning Nature Reserve, which are mesic sites where cat predation had previously been assumed to be of little significance (Burrows et al. 2003).
The occurrence of high levels of cat predation in fox-baited areas is of concern because features of cat behaviour may enable them to exert intense predation pressure on native species. For example, cats have a greater preference for live prey than foxes (Lapidge and Henshall 2001) and ingest more small mammals (Short et al. 1999;Read and Bowen 2001). They have also been observed to target individual species and to continue to do this even when that species is at low abundance (Gibson et al. 1994). Cats are more difficult to control than foxes because they are less likely to ingest baits (Risbey et al. 1997;Moseby and Hill 2011) and the higher 1080 dose (4.5 mg) needed in each cat bait to be effective poses a risk to some non-target threatened species especially in the mesic south-west of Western Australia (Hetherington et al. 2007).
There is no evidence to suggest that sustained effective fox control resulted in increased predation on woylies by native predators. Predation by native species was significantly lower than that of cats and foxes. Very few woylies were ingested by pythons or by wedge-tailed eagles. Chuditch naturally recolonised Dryandra Woodland during the study and the first (and only detected) instance of predation by chuditch occurred in May 2007. Chuditch abundance has since increased at Dryandra Woodland and Tutanning Nature Reserve (Parks and Wildlife, unpubl. data), and it is unclear how they will interact with feral cats, which are known to prey on them (cf. Glen et al. 2009).

[SECTION] cat abundance
We provide strong evidence for a substantial difference in the abundance of cats between the baited and unbaited sites. Many sets of cat tracks were present when fox density was reduced in baited sites but only a single set of tracks was detected at unbaited sites during five monitoring sessions between May 2008 and August 2009. It was regrettable that too few individual cats were identified for capture-recapture analysis to be applied and thus it became necessary to use activity indices (Allen et al. 1996). The assumption underlying the use of activity indices that there is a positive, linear relationship between the index and absolute abundance (Anderson 2003) may have been violated, especially if cats altered their behaviour and visited more sand-plots when the density of foxes was reduced (cf. Kennedy et al. 2012). Nevertheless, activity indices have been demonstrated to provide repeatable estimates of abundance that are positively correlated with the estimates of the number of individuals known to be alive, especially at low densities (Allen et al. 1996;Mahon et al. 1998;Allen and Engeman 2014). Also, we attempted to reduce the effects of any behavioural heterogeneity on the estimates of cat abundance by employing the I KTBA , which is less susceptible to density-dependent changes in behaviour (Engeman 2005). In this study both approaches yielded similar results and revealed a marked difference between the baited and unbaited sites. This outcome supports the conclusion that cat abundance is greater in sites baited for fox control than in unbaited sites.

[SECTION] the transition between fox and cat-dominated predation
Our results show that cats exert significant predation pressure on woylies in Dryandra Woodland and Tutanning Nature Reserve. Yet, for a period of ~10 years after the implementation of fox baiting, woylie abundance increased rapidly and was maintained before dramatically crashing. If, as our results suggest, cats are largely responsible for suppressing these woylie populations, it is unclear why that effect took so long to occur. Cat abundance either did not immediately increase, or additional behavioural or environmental changes were necessary to catalyse the decline of woylies. One possible explanation is that cats are known to coexist with potential prey species for several years until individuals develop hunting skills for that particular prey species (Dickman 1996a). Alternatively, cats may have switched prey from rabbits following the introduction of calicivirus disease in 1996, and during repeated outbreaks of this disease between 1996 and 2000, when rabbit abundance declined significantly in the region (Bruce and Twigg 2005). This may have resulted in cats increasing their consumption of alternative prey species, such as woylies, which they are known to do when resource availability changes (Catling 1988;Martin et al. 1996;Molsher et al. 1999;Read and Bowen 2001;Holden and Mutze 2002). Both these hypotheses require further investigation to obtain a more thorough understanding of the factors that promote high levels of cat predation on wildlife in Australia.

[SECTION] interactions between foxes and cats
The high rate of cat predation on woylies, the increase in cat abundance in fox-baited sites, and the decrease in trap success of woylies are all consistent with cats replacing foxes as the dominant predator of woylies when foxes were controlled. The mechanism by which the presence of foxes maintained cat abundances at low levels is unknown but foxes may have excluded cats, at least partially, though intraguild predation (Christensen and Burrows 1995;Molsher 1999;Risbey et al. 2000;Robley et al. 2004). Some direct predation on cats by foxes was detected in Dryandra Woodland and Tutanning Nature Reserve during this study (Marlow et al. 2014b) and it has been observed elsewhere (Brunner et al. 1991;Molsher 1999;Short et al. 1999;Robley et al. 2004). Foxes may also have excluded cats through behavioural mechanisms because the behaviour of cats has been observed to change in areas where foxes are controlled and foxes are known to act aggressively towards cats (Molsher 1999).
The interactions between mammalian predators and how these influence the effectiveness of control programs and conservation outcomes are currently a focus of research in Australia (Glen and Dickman 2005;Johnson et al. 2007;Dickman et al. 2009;Ritchie and Johnson 2009;Letnic et al. 2009Letnic et al. , 2012;;Wallach and O'Neill 2009;Moseby et al. 2012;Newsome and Ripple 2014). Our conclusion that the sustained control of foxes has mediated increased cat abundance and predation on wildlife is similar to the suggestion that the control of dingoes (Canis lupus dingo) has increased the abundance and predatory impact of foxes and cats (Johnson et al. 2007;Ritchie and Johnson 2009;Wallach et al. 2009;Glen 2012). The role of dingoes remains controversial (Glen 2012;Allen and Fleming 2012;Fleming et al. 2012;Allen et al. 2012) and will remain so until rigorous experiments are undertaken (Hayward and Marlow 2014). However, what these studies recognise is that the interactions between predators can be complex and before the control of one predator is considered it needs to be recognised that there is a potential for multiple ecosystem effects and that these can have unforseen or negative consequences for wildlife conservation (Ritchie and Johnson 2009).

[SECTION] disease
It has been suggested that disease may have been one driver of woylie declines in south-west Western Australia by creating a predisposition to predation (Wayne et al. 2014;Pacioni et al. 2014). This possibility cannot be excluded but no obviously diseased woylies were observed in Dryandra Woodland and Tutanning Nature Reserve during the declines (Parks and Wildlife, unpubl. data), nor during this study. Further investigation of this topic is warranted especially as a population decrease could occur even if only a few individuals were infected (Hone 1999).

[SECTION] implications for future fauna recovery programs
Whatever the reason for the woylie decline in 2000, there is currently significant predation on woylies by cats in Dryandra Woodland and Tutanning Nature Reserve. It is therefore highly likely that cat predation may also be responsible for the recent declines in other fauna in the south-west of Western Australia, including ring-tailed possums (Pseudocheirus occidentalis) (de Tores et al. 2004), and southern brown bandicoots (quenda) (Isoodon obesulus) (Orell 2004). The identification of significant cat predation in mesic environments has important management implications for the Western Shield feral predator control program. Whereas historically only fox baiting was used to promote the recovery of threatened species in south-west Western Australia (de Tores and Marlow 2012), it is now clear that cat control is also an essential requirement. It is also possible that predation by cats may become more pronounced in other sites around Australia where foxes are routinely controlled to protect wildlife, and wildlife managers need to be mindful of this prospect.
A comprehensive, coordinated cat-control methodology needs to be developed for the south-west of Western Australia, and elsewhere, if woylies and other fauna are to be protected from cat predation. Cat baiting (Algar and Burrows 2004;Algar et al. 2007) and other novel cat-control methodologies (e.g. Short et al. 1997) could be combined to produce an effective reduction in cat abundance. This cat-control program must be able to be implemented in areas where non-target species that are vulnerable to 1080 poisoning also occur and encapsulation of 1080 or other toxins may be necessary (Hetherington et al. 2007;de Tores et al. 2011). When the optimum cat-control methodology has been identified it should be integrated with fox-baiting programs so that effective and efficient control of both introduced predators is achieved. The abundances of cats and foxes also need be monitored regularly (Reddiex and Forsyth 2006) to elucidate interactions among predator species and to evaluate the effectiveness of the control measures.

