[SECTION] title
A method for estimating population sex ratio for sage-grouse using noninvasive genetic samples

[SECTION] abstract
Population sex ratio is an important metric for wildlife management and conservation, but estimates can be difficult to obtain, particularly for sexually monomorphic species or for species that differ in detection probability between the sexes. Noninvasive genetic sampling (NGS) using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) has become a common method for identifying sex from sources such as hair, feathers or faeces, and is a potential source for estimating sex ratio. If, however, PCR success is sex-biased, naively using NGS could lead to a biased sex ratio estimator. We measured PCR success rates and error rates for amplifying the W and Z chromosomes from greater sage-grouse (Centrocercus urophasianus) faecal samples, examined how success and error rates for sex identification changed in response to faecal sample exposure time, and used simulation models to evaluate precision and bias of three sex assignment criteria for estimating population sex ratio with variable sample sizes and levels of PCR replication. We found PCR success rates were higher for females than males and that choice of sex assignment criteria influenced the bias and precision of corresponding sex ratio estimates. Our simulations demonstrate the importance of considering the interplay between the sex bias of PCR success, number of genotyping replicates, sample size, true population sex ratio and accuracy of assignment rules for designing future studies. Our results suggest that using faecal DNA for estimating the sex ratio of sage-grouse populations has great potential and, with minor adaptations and similar marker evaluations, should be applicable to numerous species.

[SECTION] introduction
The sex ratio of free-ranging wildlife populations is an important metric for management and conservation as well as for understanding the evolutionary ecology of a species (Whittingham & Dunn 2000). Population sex ratios are useful for modelling offspring sex allocation and sex differences in survival (Donald 2007), are a necessary component for determining effective population size and modelling population viability (Lens et al. 1998;Saether et al. 2004), and can be used as a metric of habitat suitability or food abundance (Wiebe & Bortolotti 1992;Stauss et al. 2005). Quantifying sex ratio is often difficult, especially for sexually monomorphic species, or for species where one sex is difficult to census (Donald 2007). Accurate estimates of sex ratio are further complicated by differences in behaviour and ecology that exist between sexes such that most methods of sampling are sex-biased (Donald 2007).
Analysis of noninvasive genetic samples offers an alternative method for estimating the sex ratio of a population from hair, feathers or faeces that does not require capture or handling individuals (Waits & Paetkau 2005;Regnaut et al. 2006). The efficacy of DNA sexing techniques has been demonstrated for numerous species using feathers (Sacchi et al. 2004;Bush et al. 2005;Costantini et al. 2008;Gebhardt & Waits 2008), hair (Sloane et al. 2000;Banks et al. 2003;Fontanesi et al. 2008) and faeces (Robertson et al. 1999;Dallas et al. 2000;Segelbacher & Steinbr€ uck 2001;Eggert et al. 2003;Idaghdour et al. 2003;Regnaut et al. 2006).
Due to the minute amount of DNA typically obtained using NGS techniques, errors from allelic dropout and PCR-generated false alleles are common (Taberlet et al. 1996;Broquet et al. 2007). To minimize the probability of assigning the wrong sex due to these problems, researchers have suggested techniques such as PCR replication using the multiple-tube approach and rigorous assignment criteria (Taberlet et al. 1996;Gagneux et al. 1997). When the primary objective is estimating sex ratio, a secondary source of error could be introduced by using a sex assignment method that is biased, (i.e. has a greater probability of accurately assigning one sex over the other). This occurs because the probability of allelic dropout may be higher for one sex than the other due to differences in fragment length or priming site mismatches and because confidence in assigning heterozygotes (females in the case of birds, males for mammals) is typically achieved with lower numbers of PCR replicates than confidence in assigning homozygotes (Taberlet et al. 1996).
Greater sage-grouse (Centrocercus urophasianus, hereafter sage-grouse) are an ideal candidate for using NGS to estimate population sex ratio. Sage-grouse have a lek mating system where males congregate on traditional display grounds each spring and females visit infrequently to select a mate and to copulate (Wiley 1978;Gibson & Bradbury 1986). Because of the conspicuousness of displaying males and the persistence of lek sites, number of males attending a lek or group of leks is commonly used as an index for detecting inter-annual population trends (Dalke et al. 1963;Connelly et al. 2000;Garton et al. 2011). However, since hens are considerably less conspicuous and their use of leks is much more variable than that of males (Gibson & Bradbury 1986;Schroeder et al. 1999), lek counts are ineffective for censusing females and therefore cannot be used to estimate sex ratios for sage-grouse.
In this study, we (1) determined PCR success rates and error rates for amplifying the W and Z chromosomes from faecal samples of sage-grouse using known sex samples, (2) examined how success and error rates for sex identification change in response to faecal sample exposure time in the field, and (3) used simulation models to determine how many PCR replicates are needed while evaluating bias and precision of 3 different sex assignment criteria for estimating population sex ratio for sage-grouse with various sample sizes.

[SECTION] materials and methods
We collected sage-grouse faecal samples from birds of known sex that were radio-marked for a separate study. Sex of sage-grouse is easily distinguished by overall size and plumage (Dalke et al. 1963). This study was conducted on Browns Bench, Idaho, USA, which receives approximately 24 cm of precipitation annually and ranges in elevation from 1524 m to 2300 m. Major cover types include little sagebrush (Artemisia arbuscula)/black sagebrush (A. nova)/grass, Wyoming big sagebrush (A. tridentata wyomingensis)/grass, mountain big sagebrush (A. t. vaseyana)/grass, mountain shrub and crested wheatgrass (Agropyron cristatum) seedings (Hironaka et al. 1983;Klott et al. 1993).

[SECTION] field sampling
We flushed 11 individual females and 7 individual males from roost sites in early morning of 12 February 2010, after the birds had deposited numerous faecal pellets in 'roost piles' over the course of the night. We chose to use faeces because sage-grouse defecate rectal faeces in a pellet form that, relative to feathers, are easy to locate for both sexes and not likely to be confused with that of other species. Location of each roost pile was recorded with a hand held GPS unit and marked with a pin flag to facilitate re-visitation. Sage-grouse roost on the ground in openings of sagebrush (Patterson 1952) and there is no evidence that they have any fidelity to a nightly roost site. Age of faecal pellets associated with each bird appeared similar and was assumed to be <1 day old. Sage-grouse have well developed ceca and defecate cecal faeces separately: these are easily distinguishable from the typical rectal faeces (Klasing 2005). For this study, we collected and analysed only rectal faeces. Faecal samples were placed in a coin envelope in an airtight plastic bag with silica until DNA extraction. A single faecal pellet was collected on the day birds were flushed (Time 0) and at the following time intervals after deposition: 2 days, 4 days, 6 days, 8 days, 15 days, 23 days, 34 and 124 days (18 June). Over this time, daily high temperatures ranged between 1.1 and 28.9 °C, daily low temperatures ranged between À8.8 and 13.3 °C, and a total of 11.7 cm of precipitation was measured 60 km from our field site at the Joslin Field-Magic Valley Regional Airport (National Climatic Data Service, NOAA 2012). Number of pellets was noted at time of each visit to ensure no new pellets had been added since day 0. Variation in faecal DNA degradation can depend on environmental factors such as precipitation and ambient temperature (Brinkman et al. 2010). For this study, we only considered the effects of time, so no weather covariates were considered.

[SECTION] dna analysis
DNA was extracted in a room dedicated to low quantity DNA samples using a DNeasy Blood and Tissue kit (Qiagen, Inc.). We had compared this extraction technique previously to using the Qiamp DNA Stool Mini Kit (Qiagen, Inc.) and found a higher success rate with the tissue kit (unpublished data). We used 2-3 mm from each end of one pellet in the extraction. All samples were amplified three times using a multiplex PCR that we developed to include two sets of fluorescently labelled sex ID primers 1237L/1272H (Kahn et al. 1998;hereafter Kahn) and 2550F/2718R (Fridolfsson & Ellegren 1999, hereafter Frid). The Frid primers amplify a portion of the CHD gene flanking an intron where the sex-dependent fragment (on the W chromosome) found only in females is shorter than the sex-independent fragment (on the Z chromosome) found in both males and females (W: 450 bp, Z: 600 bp). The Kahn primers amplify a different intron of the CHD gene, and the sex-dependent fragment is longer than the sex-independent fragment for most birds (Z: 240 bp, W: 270 bp for sage-grouse). We amplified all samples in a multiplex containing 3.5 9 Qiagen Master Mix (from the Multiplex PCR Kit), 0.5 9 Q solution, 0.14 lM each of Kahn primers and 0.57 lM each of Frid primers. PCR conditions started with a 95 °C denaturation step for 15 min, followed by 45 cycles of 94 °C for 30 s, 51-48 °C for 90 s (stepping down 0.5 °C per cycle until reaching 48 °C) and 72 °C for 30 s, and a final annealing step of 60 °C for 30 min. PCRs were performed with a Tetrad 2 DNA Engine thermal cycler (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) and PCR products were separated with a 3130xl Capillary Sequencer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) and visualized using GENEMAPPER 3.7 (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA).
We estimated PCR success rates and genotyping error rates for each primer set across all time points. PCR success rates were estimated for males and females combined as the number of successful amplifications for each primer set divided by the total number of PCRs attempted for each primer set (Broquet & Petit 2004). We estimated allelic dropout error rates for females as the failure to amplify the W or the Z chromosome divided by number of successful amplifications and we estimated the false allele error rates for males as the number of times the W chromosome amplified for a male sample out of the total number of successful PCRs (Broquet & Petit 2004). We tested for a linear relationship between total PCR success and days of exposure. Since PCR data consists of binary responses, we used logistic regression with Generalized Estimating Equations (Liang & Zeger 1986), treating each sample from the same faecal pile as a repeated observation.
We evaluated sex assignment success rates and resulting sex ratio estimates across all time points from the three replicates of the two primer sets using three possible criteria for assigning sex ID. Criterion 1 required two Z/W or W chromosome results to assign the sample as female and three Z chromosome results to classify a male. The basis of this criterion is that the weight of evidence to confirm a heterozygote is less than that required to confirm a homozygote because allelic dropout is a much more common artefact of NGS analysis than generation of a specific false allele (Gagneux et al. 1997), and is often used in NGS studies for this reason (e.g., Stenglein et al. 2011). However, this conservative criterion might lead to a skew in estimated sex ratios because success rates for females (requiring two positive PCRs) could be higher than success rates for males (requiring three successful PCRs). Criterion 2 required two Z/W or W chromosome results to classify as female and two Z chromosome results for male. This criterion was designed to ensure accuracy through duplication, but attempts to equalize opportunity for successful identification of males and females. Criterion 3 required a single Z/W or W chromosome result to classify as female and only a single Z chromosome result for male. The third criterion was the least conservative and was designed to maximize the number of samples assigned one sex or the other and thereby increase sample size used to estimate sex ratio. As a tradeoff, this criterion has a higher likelihood of misclassifying females as males when the W chromosome drops out. All results that did not meet requirements for a given criterion were considered inconclusive and were not used for estimating the sex ratio.
We calculated sex assignment success as the proportion of all the samples that were assigned a sex for each of the three criteria. Estimated sex ratio was determined from number of samples successfully assigned either sex and expressed as proportion female estimated.

[SECTION] simulations
We simulated a population of sage-grouse faecal samples to investigate the effects of sample size and true sex ratio on the efficacy of the three sex assignment criteria for estimating sex ratio. We used the frequencies of results for each sex from the first eight observations (day 0-day 34) of the 18 roost piles to estimate the probabilities of PCR amplification for our simulations. We treated the repeated measures through time as independent samples and considered the three PCR replicates for each primer set and the results from the two primer sets as independent. While there may be some autocorrelation between loci amplified in the same reaction, the high level of efficiency of the enzymes used in this reaction should have minimized this effect. We simulated samples with a balanced sex ratio (1:1), modestly skewed sex ratios of 1:1.25 in favour of both males and females, and a more extreme skew of 1:2.5 in both directions using sample sizes of 50, 100, 150, 300 and 500, and replicated each simulation 5000 times. We analysed each sex assignment criterion with three PCR replicates, and also analysed the second and third assignment criteria with only two PCR replicates for both primer sets. For each combination of sex ratio, sample size and number of replicates, we simu-lated the sampling distribution of estimated sex ratio, and calculated the mean, mean bias and mean variance for the estimated sex ratio for each assignment criterion. Simulations were performed in program R (R Development Core Team 2009).

[SECTION] dna analysis
PCR success rates for both primers for the first eight time periods were higher for females than males and greater for the Kahn primers than the Frid primers (Table 1). Average success with Kahn primers for collection intervals 1-8 were 83% and 76% for female and male, respectively, and with Frid primers were 44% and 23% for female and male respectively. There was no evidence of a linear trend in total PCR success from day 0 to day 34 (slope = 0.015, SE = 0.019, Z = 1.23, P = 0.218); however, success dropped to 0 for both sexes with the Frid primers and 15% and 14% for female and male, respectively, with the Kahn primers at day 124. Average PCR error rates for failure to amplify the W allele in females over the first eight collection intervals were the same for both primer sets (15%, Table 1). Failure to amplify the Z allele in females was greater with the Frid primers than with the Kahn primers (57% and 14%, respectively). False W allele amplification was not observed for males with either of the primer sets used for any collection period.
Success rates for sex assignment were at or above 50% for all three criteria at all time points except at t = 124 days and did not show a decrease over time through day 34 (Fig. 1). Average sex assignment success rates using the more stringent Criterion 1 were 66% (range 6-89%) and were highest at 34 days. When using Criterion 2, average sex assignment success rates increased to 73% (range 11-94%) and were highest at 15 days. Average sex assignment success rates using Criterion 3 were highest, averaging 83% (range 28-100%), and reaching 100% at 34 days. No samples were misclassified using Criterion 1, and only one sample was misclassified for Criterion 2 (one female misclassified as male from samples with 124 days of exposure). The third criterion resulted in six misclassifications of females as males; one with 2 exposure days, one with 4 exposure days and four with 124 exposure days.
The estimates of sex ratio at each time point typically differed from the true sex ratio (0.611) because some samples failed to amplify (Fig. 1). When using Criterion 1, the estimates from days 0-34 were biased towards females and were on average 0.029 higher than the true proportion (Table 2). When using Criterion 2, the average bias across samples from days 0-34 was 0.010, but biased towards males. The average bias across these same time points was <0.001 for the third criterion and was also biased towards males.

[SECTION] simulations
We used our empirical marker frequency results from 862 observations (18 birds 9 8 repeated samples 9 2 primers 9 3 typing replicates, less 1 typing replicate for each primer for 1 female that was not run; Table 3) as multinomial probabilities to generate simulated sagegrouse faecal sample populations. Criterion 1 disproportionally failed to assign sex to faecal samples from male sage-grouse at all sample sizes and sex ratios, resulting in female-biased estimates (Fig. 2). Because Criterion 1 was the most conservative set of decision rules, this method consistently used the least number of sexassigned samples to estimate the sex ratio and resulted in the largest standard errors, which were exceptionally large with relatively small samples sizes (n < 200).
Both Criteria 2 and 3 resulted in more accurate estimates of sex ratio than criterion 1 under all simulated conditions. When only two PCR replicates were used, Criterion 2 resulted in sex ratio estimates that were similar in precision to estimates from Criterion 1 with Table 1 PCR success and error rates for both primer sets and sexes at nine exposure times from greater sage-grouse faecal samples collected on Brown's Bench, Idaho, USA, 2010. First number in each column refers to the Fridolfsson and Ellegren (1999, Frid)  Average (day 0-34) Female Success 0.52 0.85 0.33 0.76 0.48 0.85 0.27 0.82 0.18 0.61 0.64 0.97 0.53 0.97 0.55 0.85 0.00 0.15 0.44 0.83 W dropout 0.18 0.18 0.09 0.20 0.13 0.18 0.22 0.33 0.00 0.10 0.19 0.06 0.29 0.06 0.11 0.11 NA 1.00 0.15 0.15 Z dropout 0.47 0.07 0.45 0.12 0.50 0.14 0.56 0.22 0.67 0.30 0.57 0.03 0.65 0.16 0.67 0.07 NA 0.00 0.57 0.14 Male Success 0.48 0.71 0.29 0.95 0.24 0.71 0.05 0.67 0.19 0.76 0.10 0.76 0.05 0.52 0.43 0.95 0.00 0.14 0.23 0.76 three replicates, and slightly female biased under all but the most extreme female-skewed populations simulated. Criterion 3 resulted in slight male-biased sex ratio estimates under all but the most extreme male-skewed populations simulated. Increasing the number of PCR replicates from 2 to 3 increased the number of potential results evaluated by the various decision rules from 4 to 6, which reduced the bias and increased precision regardless of the criterion used (Figs. 2B &2C). Criteria 2 and 3 produced relatively unbiased estimates of sex ratio at all sample sizes and sex ratios simulated. Because Criterion 3 was the least conservative, this method used the largest number of sex-assigned samples to estimate sex ratio and produced the most precise estimates (i.e. relatively smallest variance).

[SECTION] discussion
We demonstrate how sex ratios can be accurately estimated for greater sage-grouse populations from noninvasive genetic samples despite sex bias PCR success. With minor adaptations, the methods we outlined above should be applicable to numerous species, adding to the limited number of existing tools for estimating population sex ratio. PCR amplification was relatively successful (>75% with the Kahn primers) for sage-grouse faecal samples with <34 exposure days and we did not detect a decrease in success with exposure time during this period. This indicates a slow rate of DNA degradation in these samples, potentially resulting from dry conditions and/or the diet of this species, and differs from results showing PCR success rates dropping rapidly for mammals under more humid conditions (Murphy et al. 2007;Brinkman et al. 2010). These results are encouraging since field-collected faecal samples of unknown origin can only be qualitatively dated as fresh or not. PCR success was greater with the Kahn primers than the Frid primers, as was expected considering the PCR product size amplified by each primer set and the degraded quality and low quantity of DNA typical of noninvasive samples (Buchan et al. 2005). Despite the relatively poor success of the Frid primers, we chose a multiplex approach for our analysis since doing so doubled the number of potential outcomes to evaluate for sex assignment from 3 to 6 with minimal increase in cost. A multiplex approach is a common approach for improving efficiency for species identification (Dalen et al. 2004;Mukherjee et al. 2007) and individual identification (Jacob et al. 2010;Stenglein et al. 2011) of NGS, but it is rarely used in sex ID (Gebhardt & Waits 2008).
Our use of the three sex assignment criteria resulted in sex ratio estimates that differed in bias and precision. PCR success was lower for males than females for both primer sets which, when combined with the more conservative sex assignment rule for males than for females in Criterion 1, resulted in female-biased sex ratio estimates (Table 2). The sex assignment rules for Criterion 2 greatly reduced the effects of the biased PCR success, resulting in relatively unbiased sex ratio estimates. The least conservative assignment rules of Criterion 3 resulted in the largest proportion of the sample of both males and females assigned a sex, and the greatest probability of falsely assigning females as males. Under the conditions we simulated with three PCR replicates, the erroneous assignments seemed to offset the female-biased PCR success, resulting in relatively unbiased sex ratio estimates with the greatest precision.
With birds, identification of the homozygous male may be a factual result from male DNA or the result of failure to amplify the female 'W' gene. Increasing genotyping replication increases the probability of W allele amplification for females and thus reduces the probability of assignment errors (Lynch & Brown 2006). In our simulation example, increasing from 2 to 3 typing replicates decreased the proportion of female samples that were falsely assigned as males, reducing the slight male bias of Criterion 3 (Fig. 2C). The tradeoff to typing replication is an increase in costs of approximately 25% for each additional replicate beyond 2 due to increased time and products required.
Our study is an important first step towards developing a noninvasive method for estimating population sex ratios for sage-grouse. Further research is needed to examine the rate of degradation of faecal DNA under various environmental conditions and over the 1-4 month time period to verify that the sex bias in PCR success that we observed does not change under different field conditions and longer exposure times. In addition, if this method was considered to estimate sex ratio of brooding young, potential effects of the differing diet of sub-adults on the rate of degradation of faecal DNA would also need to be considered since other studies have shown an effect of diet on faecal DNA amplification success (Murphy et al. 2007;Panasci et al. 2011).
We used faecal samples collected in winter because at this time sage-grouse are commonly found in mixed-sex flocks (Beck 1977;Connelly 1982) and both sexes use the same areas for foraging and roosting, regardless of flock composition. To use the method we described for estimating population sex-ratio, a study design that produces a random sample of faecal pellets is necessary. For sage-grouse, we suggest collecting faecal pellets along predefined transect lines established through wintering grounds. Coordinating collections to immediately follow snow events should reduce the likelihood of collecting multiple samples from the same bird, as well as ensuring a relatively high quality of DNA if only faecal samples from on top of the snow are collected. To further reduce the likelihood that individual birds are represented multiple times in the sample, single pellets from roost piles could be collected rather than collecting individual pellets that are defecated singularly as the birds forage.
Additional information with regard to faecal deposition rates for males and females would improve estimates when relating a sex ratio of faecal samples to an actual population sex ratio. The assumption of equal deposition rates between the sexes may not be valid for sage-grouse considering the nearly 2 to 1 size dimorphism of males compared with females (Schroeder et al. 1999). Individual identification by molecular typing from a large sample of faeces could be used to test the assumption of equal faecal deposition rates (Kohn et al. 1999;Ebert et al. 2010;Jacob et al. 2010). These data could be further analysed under a mark-recapture framework  such that detection probabilities between the sexes could be used to estimate differences in faecal deposition rates (Lukacs & Burnham 2005). The efficacy of the method we describe also relies on the assumption that there is no heterogeneity in habitat use between the sexes at the sampling scale (Dallas et al. 2000), which will require scrutiny of individual populations.
Application of this method for other species is possible with some key modifications. These include: identifying one or more sex ID primers for the species of interest, estimating the sex bias in PCR success and developing sex assignment criteria and level of replication that results in unbiased estimates of sex ratio from known sex samples, and sampling from a space and time that both sexes use equally.
The results from our analysis of field-collected sagegrouse faeces in winter and spring and our simulations suggest that estimating the sex ratio of wild populations using faecal DNA has great potential; however, failing to account for the potential sex bias in PCR success can lead to greatly biased sex ratio estimates. Our simulations demonstrate the importance of considering the interplay between the sex bias of PCR success, number of genotyping replicates, sample size, true population sex ratio and accuracy of assignment rules for designing future studies. Furthermore, the research goal of a study where sex ratio is estimated has bearing on the study design. For example, if detection of a difference among sex ratios is desired, maximizing precision and therefore power is advantageous. If, however, sex ratios will be used to relate known numbers of one sex to unknown numbers of the other sex, methods minimizing the bias in sex ratio estimates should be sought in exchange for precision and/or cost. Alternatively, our methods outlined above could be used to develop an unbiased estimator of sex ratio by estimating and correcting for bias with any single set of criteria.
Continued development of estimating sex ratio from faeces will hopefully improve our understanding of sex ratios of sage-grouse populations. This approach to estimating population sex ratios using species-appropriate makers, may prove to be useful for populations of other species of galliformes and terrestrial anseriformes that typically produce faeces in a pellet form, as well as most mammals, provided any bias in defecation rates or detection rates between the sexes is accounted for. Other forms of noninvasive DNA could also be used, such as hair or feathers (Taberlet et al. 1999;Waits & Paetkau 2005), to produce an unbiased estimator of population sex ratios for an even greater number of species.
====================================================================================================
FILE: Estimating puma Puma concolor population size in a human-disturbed landscape in Brazil, using DNAmar.grobid.tei (1).xml
====================================================================================================

[SECTION] title
Estimating puma Puma concolor population size in a human-disturbed landscape in Brazil, using DNA mark-recapture data

[SECTION] abstract
The genetics and ecology of pumas are well documented in North America but there is a lack of studies in South America, especially in Brazil. By means of a noninvasive method, faecal DNA analysis, we estimated puma abundance in two protected areas embedded in a human-disturbed landscape in the north-east of São Paulo state, in south-east Brazil. In 8 months of mark-recapture faeces sampling, 15 individual pumas were identified using seven microsatellite loci. The estimated abundance of pumas with the Jolly-Seber open population model was 23.81 ± SE 6.22. This is the first estimate of the abundance of pumas in a human-dominated landscape in São Paulo state, the most populous, developed and industrialized state of Brazil. The absence of high-quality habitats in the northeast of the state, the absence of direct competitors and the high availability of prey in protected areas are probably contributing to the high number of pumas concentrated in a relatively small area (c. 260 km 2 ). Our results will contribute to the long-term monitoring of this puma population and, combined with other ecological, behavioural and genetic data, will help guide conservation action to maintain a viable population of the puma in this region.

[SECTION] introduction
I n the 20th century the north-east area of São Paulo state, Brazil, changed drastically (Dean, 1996;Martinelli & Filoso, 2008). The development of urban centres, expansion of sugar cane and eucalyptus plantations, and extensive enlargement of the road network resulted in considerable habitat loss and fragmentation of natural vegetation cover. Despite this intensive transformation some large carnivore species, such as the puma Puma concolor, still inhabit the area (Miotto et al., 2007;Lyra-Jorge et al., 2008). How these carnivores are able to survive in the remnant habitat fragments, and their population sizes, require study. Estimation of the size of carnivore populations is important for conservation management, especially in human-dominated landscapes, and monitoring this parameter provides managers with a measure of the effectiveness of conservation actions (Caughley, 1994;Karanth et al., 2006;Kelly et al., 2008).
Mark-recapture methods have been used to estimate population size of large carnivores, based on camera-trap photographs (Karanth & Nichols, 1998;Trolle & Kéry, 2003;Silver et al., 2004;Trolle et al., 2007;Kelly et al., 2008;Paviolo et al., 2009;Silveira et al., 2009) or radio-telemetry tracking data (Franklin et al., 1999;Logan & Sweanor, 2001;Soisalo & Cavalcanti, 2006). As an alternative, noninvasive genetic sampling has become a powerful tool for studying and monitoring elusive and low-density species (Waits & Paetkau, 2005;Schwartz et al., 2007;Janečka et al., 2008). DNA from sources such as hair or faeces can be used as molecular tags in mark-recapture population censuses (Bellemain et al., 2005;Prugh et al., 2005;Boulanger et al., 2008;De Barba et al., 2010). In this context collecting noninvasive samples is equivalent to capturing the animal that deposited the genetic sample. The probability of encountering faeces can therefore be referred to the capture probability. Because each animal has a unique multilocus genotype, each individual can be identified. Closed or open-population models can then be applied, depending on the length of the sampling period, and births, deaths, emigration and immigration can be used to estimate population parameters such as abundance, survival and recruitment.
The puma is the most widely distributed large terrestrial mammal in the Americas (Iriarte et al., 1990). It has been studied extensively in North America (Ross & Jalkotzy, 1992;Roelke et al., 1993;Lindzey et al., 1994;Beier et al., 1995;Ernest et al., 2000;Logan & Sweanor, 2001;Anderson et al., 2004;McRae et al., 2005) but not in such detail in South America. Puma population sizes and densities have been estimated in a few studies (Franklin et al., 1999, in Patagonia, Chile;Kelly et al., 2008, in Bolívia, Argentina and Belize;Paviolo et al., 2009, in the Green Corridor of Atlantic Forest in Misiones Province, Argentina) but there have been few studies in Brazil (Mazzolli, 2010;Negrões et al., 2010), especially in human-disturbed areas. Puma research in Brazil has concentrated on food habits or habitat use (Emmons, 1987;Ciocheti, 2007;Lyra-Jorge et al., 2008), movement (Schaller & Crawshaw, 1980) and human-puma conflicts (Mazzolli et al., 2002;Conforti & Azevedo, 2003;Azevedo, 2008).
Here, we present an estimate of the population size of pumas inhabiting a human-disturbed landscape in the north-east of São Paulo state, based on a DNA markrecapture method. Using microsatellites we individualized marked and recaptured samples of puma faeces and estimated population abundance by applying an open population model framework.

[SECTION] study area
The study area encompasses c. 260 km 2 and is located in the Luís Antônio and Santa Rita do Passa Quatro municipalities, in north-east São Paulo state, Brazil (Fig. 1). The area is characterized as transitional between Cerrado and semi-deciduous Atlantic forest. There are two protected areas 3 km apart, the Jataí Ecological Station and the Vassununga State Park, in addition to some habitat patches on private properties. The 9,000 ha Jataí Ecological Station is the largest protected area in the state with continuous Cerrado vegetation. The 2,070 ha Vassununga State Park contains six distinct patches of Cerrado and semi-deciduous forest (Korman, 2003). In our sampling in Vassununga State Park we concentrated on the largest patch (Pé de Gigante, 1,210 ha), as the smaller patches are surrounded by intensive human activity and unlikely to be used by pumas. Both protected areas are surrounded by sugar cane crops, cattle ranches, eucalyptus plantations, dirt roads and highways but still retain high faunal diversity (Talamoni et al., 2000).

[SECTION] sample collection
From 2004 to 2008 we conducted a noninvasive puma monitoring project in the study area (Miotto et al., 2012), collecting faeces preferentially in the dry seasons (May-August) of each year, with the exception of 2008, when we conducted monthly 2-day field excursions from March to October. For the analysis described here we used only the 2008 data because they were collected at regular intervals and on the same roads. There were eight sampling occasions, and each 2-day excursion was considered one sampling occasion. In the study area fragments and plantations are either surrounded or intersected by lowtraffic dirt roads. Our sampling scheme encompassed these roads, covering c. 200 km in each field trip (Fig. 1). Pumas tend to use dirt roads to move from one place to another (Dickson et al., 2005) and, especially in the study area, they commonly defecate on these roads (authors, pers. obs.). Samples were collected exclusively from these roads. All fieldwork was conducted by car and by two researchers. Based on tracks and the diameter and morphology of faeces we collected 37 potential puma faecal samples, and we recorded the locations of all collections, using a global positioning system. Samples were stored in sterile, preservative-free plastic tubes without any conservation solution and kept at -22°C in the laboratory until the DNA extraction was performed.
DNA extraction Faecal DNA was extracted using the QIAmp DNA Stool Mini Kit (Qiagen) or PSP Spin Stool DNA Kit (Invitek), following manufacturer's recommendations. For the blood and tissue DNA extractions used as reference sequences in the genetic analysis we followed the phenol/chloroform/isoamylic alcohol protocol described in Sambrook et al. (1989). We collected these samples directly from pumas killed or injured in collisions with vehicles in the region and from the government agency Centro Nacional de Pesquisa e Conservação de Mamíferos Carnívoros, which has a blood/tissue bank.

[SECTION] species identification
To confirm the species of the collected faecal samples we amplified and sequenced a 146 bp portion from the cytochrome b gene of the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), using primers described by Farrell et al. (2000). Details of the amplification, sequencing and analysis procedures are described in Miotto et al. (2007).
Individual identification To individualize each faecal sample we amplified a set of seven species-specific microsatellite loci, with primers developed by Kurushima et al. (2006): Pco C108 (a tetranucleotide-repeat microsatellite locus), and Pco B010, Pco B210, Pco A339, Pco A208, Pco A216 and Pco B003 (dinucleotide-repeat microsatellite loci). Primers were marked with universal fluorescent M13 tails following Schuelke (2000). Each PCR reaction (15 μL) contained 7.5 μL of GoTaq Master Mix (Promega), containing 1×buffer, 1.5 mM MgCl 2 , 0.2 mM dNTPs, 1 unit Taq polymerase, 8 pmol of reverse primer, 2 pmol of forward primer, 8 pmol of M13 sequence marked with the 6-FAM fluorophore, and 150 μg ml -1 of BSA. The remaining volume of the 15 μL reaction comprised DNA. Amplifications were performed in a PTC-100 Thermocycler (MJ Research) according to the following protocol (for all primer pairs): an initial denaturation cycle at 94°C for 5 minutes, 40 cycles at 92°C for 1 minute, 48°C for 1 minute, and 72°C for 1 minute, and a final 30-minute extension at 72°C. Negative controls were included in all reactions to monitor possible contamination. The resulting genotypes were analysed in a MegaBACE ET-550R Size Standard automatic sequencer (GE Healthcare) with Genetic Profiler (GE Healthcare). We conducted individual identification of genotypes using Gimlet (Valière, 2002). To prevent misidentification as a result of allelic dropout, in which one of the two alleles in a heterozygous individual is not detected (Taberlet et al., 1996), we genotyped homozygote samples in 3-5 independent PCR reactions and genotyped heterozygotes twice. For individual identification only samples that were successfully genotyped for at least five loci were included in the analysis. To quantify the power to discriminate individuals with the microsatellite loci used we determined the identity probability (P (ID) ); i.e. the probability of two individuals in a population randomly sharing identical genotypes for all the analysed loci (Paetkau et al., 1998;Waits et al., 2001). The P (ID) values were calculated based on the allele frequencies of unique genotypes for each locus, in Gimlet (Valière, 2002), and then multiplied by the total number of loci to obtain a total P (ID) (Paetkau et al., 1998). Because we expected to sample related animals in the study area (Miotto et al., 2012) we calculated both the P (ID)unbiased and P (ID)sib equations, taking into account the population size and the presence of related individuals, respectively (Waits et al., 2001). We determined the total and per-locus genotyping error rates (allelic dropout) by dividing the number of detected errors by the number of cases in which an error might have been detected (i.e. the total number of genotyping reactions). Finally, we investigated null allele and stutters occurrence with Micro-Checker 2.2.3 (Van Oosterhout et al., 2004) Sex determination To identify the sex of the individuals sampled we amplified a portion of the amelogenin gene present in both sex chromosomes, using primers described by Pilgrim et al. (2005). In this gene fragment males have a 20 bp deletion in the Y-chromosome copy and consequently produce PCR products of different sizes, whereas females amplify fragments of the same size. To prevent false positive for females we repeated each reaction three times.
Abundance of pumas After individualizing puma faecal samples, a capture-recapture history of each animal was established for the 8-month sampling period. To estimate abundance ( N), we opted for an open population model as we assumed that animals could leave or immigrate into the study area during the sampling period. Pumas are vagile and have large home ranges and we had previous information that suggested some may frequently disperse throughout the matrix (Miotto et al., 2012). We estimated N with the Jolly-Seber probability model (Jolly, 1965;Seber, 1965), using the POPAN formulation (Schwarz & Arnason, 1996), implemented in MARK (White & Burnham, 1999). This open population model assumes the existence of a 'superpopulation' (N) in which unmarked animals have the same probability of capture as marked animals in the population (assumption of equal catchability), survival rates are homogeneous for marked and unmarked animals, the sampled area is constant, and there is no loss of mark (genetic tag in our case) during the sampling period. The parameters of this model are p i , the probability of capture of marked and unmarked individuals on occasion i, ф i , the probability of survival of marked and unmarked individuals from occasion i to i + 1, and b i , the probability of a new animal entering the population between occasions i and i + 1. To test the validity of the above assumptions a goodness of fit test was performed using RELEASE v. 3.0 (Burnham et al., 1987) and by accessing the deviance of 1,000 bootstrapped simulations based on the global timedependent Cormack-Jolly-Seber model (Dunstan et al., 2011). We selected between eight models, all nested inside the global model, allowing for temporal variation in all three parameters [ p(t)ф(t)b(t)N(.)]. The tested models are described in Table 1. To guarantee numerical convergence a multinomial link function was used for the b i parameters (constraining a set of real parameters to sum to 1.00), and in the case of the abundance parameter an identity link function was used, permitting the parameter to have values outside the [0, 1] interval. Models were ranked using the Akaike information criterion (AICc) adjusted for small population sizes. The model with the lowest AICc value was considered the model that best balanced bias and precision (White & Burnham, 1999) and, therefore, the most appropriate model for accurate estimation of abundance.

[SECTION] results
Of the 37 faecal samples collected mtDNA was amplified in 27 samples (84.37%). By comparing the sequenced mtDNA fragments we identified 24 puma faeces. Three samples belonging to ocelots Leopardus pardalis, a sympatric species present in the area, were discarded from further analysis. Genotyping success for the set of seven microsatellite loci was . 80%. We quantified a general rate of 6.56% for allelic dropout and estimated a total P (ID)unbiased of 6 × 10 -9 and a total P (ID)sib of 0.001. Our data presented no evidence of null alleles or stutter peaks. The range size, number of alleles per locus, and P ID values per locus are described in Table 2.
From the 24 samples we identified 15 different pumas. Table 3 presents their mark-recapture data (encounter history).
No evidence of overdispersion was found for the global model and therefore our models were considered to

[SECTION] noninvasive genetic analysis
The estimated values of probability of identity were low for the seven loci analysed (P (ID)unbiased of 6 × 10 -9 and P (ID)sib of 0.001). Both values are considered satisfactory for individual identification in noninvasive genotyping (Waits et al., 2001) and indicate that the analysed loci successfully distinguished each individual, even in the presence of closely related animals (Miotto et al., 2012). Because of low DNA quality and quantity, microsatellite analyses of noninvasive samples, such as faeces, are commonly affected by genotyping errors, such as allelic dropout or false allele amplification, and consequently the identification of individuals and the estimates of population size could be biased (Taberlet et al., 1996(Taberlet et al., , 1999;;Waits et al., 2001;Broquet & Petit, 2004;Prugh et al., 2005). To avoid errors we established conditions to obtain consistent genotypes: we genotyped heterozygotes twice and confirmed the genotypes of homozygotes with 3-5 independent PCR reactions, we included a locus in our analysis only if . 80% of samples were successfully genotyped, and in the final analysis we only included those samples that were genotyped for at least 80% of all the analysed loci. Unlike other felid species pumas have no pelage patterns, such as the rosettes that are features of jaguars and ocelots (Trolle & Kéry, 2003;Silver et al., 2004;Trolle et al., 2007;Silveira et al., 2009) or the stripes of tigers (Karanth & Nichols, 1998;Karanth et al., 2006) that could allow reliable individual identification in camera-trap studies. Kelly et al., (2008) proposed a protocol to identify individual pumas based on body patterns analysed by distinct researchers. This protocol was later used by Paviolo et al. (2009) but some subjectivity in individual identification remained once each researcher identified a distinct number of animals (Kelly et al., 2008). Mazzolli (2010) and Negrões et al., (2010) also based their estimates of puma population size on photographs but both studies were subject to some degree of subjectivity. Foster & Harmsen (2011) listed a number of biases that can compromise the individual identification of species that lack individually identifiable natural markers. Thus, despite some inherent challenges in the technique, mainly in tropical humid and hot regions (Norris & Michalski, 2010), as long as a rigid amplification protocol against genotype misidentification is applied (i.e. reducing allelic dropout or false allele occurrence), noninvasive genetic analysis may guarantee more accuracy in individual identification, especially for species without evident pelage patterns, and thus avoid potential under-or overestimation of population size.

[SECTION] population size estimators
The best model in our selection analysis supports temporal variation in recruitment (i.e. variation in the pattern by which new animals enter the population, either by births or immigration) and implies constancy of survival and capture probability. The support for this model was substantial, as the ΔAICc of the second best model was . 2 (Burnham & Anderson, 1998). The model is consistent with the species' biology as pumas do not have a specific reproductive season, with mating occurring throughout the year (Logan & Sweanor, 2001). Male pumas tend to disperse from natal areas whereas females may exhibit phylopatry or disperse over short distances (Logan & Sweanor, 2001). Therefore, the detected variation could be a direct response to reproduction, with the entry of males into the area for mating and the subsequent entry of newborn males and females, or a response of subadults leaving the area after the maternal care period, which occurs at 16-22 months of age (Logan & Sweanor, 2001). Unfortunately, by using
molecular markers we were not able to establish age structure and, consequently, could not distinguish cubs, juveniles or adults. In a previous study (Miotto et al., 2012), however, we detected few males and many resident females, suggesting that males may be more responsible for the flow of individuals into and out of the area. Our abundance estimate represents the entire population (males and females), as grouping the data would have weakened the analysis through over-parameterization of models. The models used for estimating abundance showed no evidence of lack of fit to the data, which reinforced the accuracy of the abundance estimates. Our sample size was small but, in addition to being constant, P (0.19 ± SE 0.06) was higher than the mean reported in other felid studies (0.13 ± SE 0.09; Foster & Harmsen, 2011).
To compare our results with other studies in South America (Franklin et al., 1999;Kelly et al., 2008;Paviolo et al., 2009), including Brazil (Mazzolli, 2010;Negrões et al., 2010), we would need to estimate density. However, as the population was demographically open we are unable to make such a comparison. For geographically open populations the effective sampled area (Â) is poorly defined relative to the sampled population (White et al., 1982) and studies using telemetry data have shown that density is overestimated by N/Â (Soisalo & Cavalcanti, 2006;Dillon & Kelly, 2008).

[SECTION] puma population size
Estimates of population size and dynamics of the puma are crucial for long-term conservation of the species, especially in human-disturbed landscapes. Our estimates of population size (23.81 ± SE 6.22) is high considering the small size of the study area. There appears to have been a recent increase in the number of pumas in north-east São Paulo state and other regions of Brazil. For example, from 2004 to 2012 in a 1,700 km 2 area that encompasses our study area, 26 pumas were killed on roads and 11 were rescued in urban areas as a result of livestock depredation (R.A. Miotto, pers. obs. & unpubl. data). Little is known about the reasons for this possible expansion, or if it will continue, but we believe it is influenced by the characteristics of the area.
In the previous 50 years the area planted with sugar cane in Brazil increased from c. 1.4 to 7 million ha (Martinelli & Filoso, 2008). More than 50% of the country's sugar cane land cover is in São Paulo state, with plantations increasing at an annual rate of c. 85,000 ha (Martinelli & Filoso, 2008). In addition to eucalyptus plantations, pastures and the development of urban centres, this intensive human activity has severely transformed the original vegetation cover of the north-east of the state. The area is now characterized by many small and a few large patches of vegetation surrounded by human-disturbed areas. Despite this transformation pumas are still present in the area, probably as a consequence of their generalist habits.
In general, carnivore densities are positively correlated with prey biomass (Franklin et al., 1999;Logan & Sweanor, 2001;Carbone & Gittleman, 2002;Karanth et al., 2006). The two protected areas in our study area are amongst the largest natural refuges for many species of the ungulate prey of pumas (Novack et al., 2005;Ciocheti, 2007) in the northeast of São Paulo state. These protected areas are therefore high-quality habitat patches in the matrix and may allow pumas to concentrate in the area and tolerate overlapping territories (Miotto et al., 2012). Intraspecific conflict may contribute to puma mortality but when prey availability is high female pumas tend to have smaller home ranges (Logan & Sweanor, 2001). Even embedded in a relatively permeable matrix, with eucalyptus plantations and sugar cane crops, pumas may be confined to these protected areas when there are no surrounding patches of similar quality. Fragments surrounding the protected areas are more susceptible to hunting pressure, which leads to decreased prey biomass and abundance (Cullen et al., 2000(Cullen et al., , 2001)). In addition, the absence of competitors such as the jaguar Panthera onca may facilitate a greater number of pumas in the study area (coexistence between different felid species may regulate population sizes; Donadio & Buskirk, 2006).
The study area may act as a source area of pumas (Miotto et al., 2012); i.e. an area where pumas are resident and raise their cubs, which then disperse as juveniles. Because molecular markers do not allow us to define age structure, we could not recognize cubs in our data set, but their probable presence in the area may have increased the population estimate.
The closest protected area .1,000 ha is c. 70 km from Jataí Ecological Station and Vassununga State Park. To maintain the puma population in this region the priority should be to improve connectivity by establishing new protected areas and increasing the size of existing protected areas such as Jataí Ecological Station and Vassununga State Park. The improvement of habitat quality on private properties, with recovery and conservation of remnant forest fragments in areas occupied by the sugar cane and wood pulp industries, would also improve landscape management for the puma.
for their help with fieldwork, and two anonymous reviewers for their comments and suggestions.

