[SECTION] title
A non-invasive tool for assessing pathogen prevalence in koala (Phascolarctos cinereus) populations: detection of Chlamydia pecorum and koala retrovirus (KoRV) DNA in genetic material sourced from scats

[SECTION] abstract
Pathogenic diseases may threaten the viability of wild animal populations, especially when already vulnerable. The mitigation of risks associated with pathogenic infections in populations is an important factor in conservation strategies. Koalas are of conservation concern across the north of their range and are affected by two main pathogens; Chlamydia pecorum and the koala retrovirus (KoRV). This study tested whether DNA from C. pecorum and KoRV could be detected in genetic material isolated from koala scats. Detection of C. pecorum in scat isolated DNA samples was compared with results obtained from urogenital swabs collected from the same individuals as part of an independent study. The ability to detect KoRV in scats from both northern and southern regions of the koala's range was also assessed. There was a high level of concordance (5/6) between the detection of C. pecorum in DNA isolated from scats and urogenital swabs from the same individual. In positive samples, C. pecorum ompA genotypes were identical between DNA from scats and urogenital swabs in two out of three cases. In samples from the south of the koala's range, KoRV copy number was higher in DNA isolated from scats compared to DNA isolated from ear tissue, potentially indicating the detection of horizontally acquired infections. Our results demonstrate the ability to detect C. pecorum and KoRV in DNA isolated from koala scats. This method will be useful for studying the prevalence, transmission and impact of these pathogens in wild populations which may subsequently inform conservation management strategies.

[SECTION] introduction
Pathogens infecting wild animal populations can affect the health of individuals and may lead to reduced fitness and mortality. Pathogenic diseases can reduce species viability and have been implicated in wild population declines (Tompkins et al. 2015). Consequently, pathogens may have a negative impact on biodiversity and their role as a potential driver of extinctions is becoming increasingly apparent (Smith et al. 2009). Greater data collection may facilitate characterisation and understanding of pathogen prevalence, transmission and impacts, and has the potential to inform and enhance management and conservation strategies.
Endemic to Australia, the koala (Phascolarctos cinereus) is an arboreal marsupial inhabiting the country's east coast, from Queensland to South Australia (Fig. 1), that has suffered dramatic population declines over the past two decades (Department of the Environment 2015). While the causes of decline are likely multifactorial, two pathogens have potential contributory roles: the obligate intracellular bacterium, Chlamydia pecorum, and the koala retrovirus (KoRV), both of which infect koalas throughout their range. C. pecorum commonly infects the eyes and/or urogenital tract of koalas (Markey et al. 2007). Ocular infection with C. pecorum may lead to severe keratoconjunctivitis (Cockram and Jackson 1981), while urogenital infections are known to result in cystitis and reproductive disease, which may lead to decreased fecundity or sterility (Martin and Handasyde 1990a;Obendorf and Handasyde 1990). A second species of Chlamydia, C. pneumoniae, also infects koalas but is usually associated with mild symptoms of disease (Jackson et al. 1999). There is evidence that different strains of C. pecorum have varying pathogenic potential (Mohamad et al. 2008(Mohamad et al. , 2014) ) and that apparently asymptomatic chlamydial infections may have hidden impacts. In cattle, for example, reduced calf growth rates have been associated with asymptomatic C. pecorum infection (Poudel et al. 2012). The potential impacts of C. pecorum on individual koalas and koala populations highlight the need for better characterisation and understanding of the prevalence of C. pecorum infection.
KoRV is a retrovirus that is considered to be endogenous in northern koala populations and in the process of becoming endogenous in southern populations (Simmons et al. 2012). Although numerous strains of KoRV have been reported to date (Xu et al. 2013(Xu et al. , 2015)), KoRV-A is most commonly detected. Unlike most known endogenous viruses, proviral KoRV (viral DNA inserted into the host genome) is capable of producing active virus (Tarlinton et al. 2005); KoRV may therefore be transmitted vertically, from parent to offspring, or horizontally via contact transmission. Modes of KoRV horizontal transmission are not clear, however KoRVs closest known relative, the gibbon ape leukaemia virus (GALV) can also be transmitted both vertically, in the germline, and horizontally, via exposure to faeces or urine (Kawakami et al. 1977(Kawakami et al. , 1978)). Though not definitive, links have been made between KoRV infection and the incidence of lymphoma and leukaemia in koalas, as well as with clinical chlamydial infections (Tarlinton et al. 2005;Xu et al. 2013). In the north of the koala's range (from Port Macquarie northwards; Fig. 1), 100 % of koalas tested were found to be infected with KoRV. However, in the south-eastern state of Victoria, there is evidence that endogenous KoRV is less common, with virus integrated only into infected cells (exogenous infection) and a significant number of Victorian koalas tested are found to be KoRV negative (Simmons et al. 2012).
Knowledge of the epidemiology of C. pecorum and KoRV across the koala's range could identify pathogen free populations and/or populations at high risk of increased mortality due to infection. Detecting pathogenic organisms in wild animals is often challenging, as sampling typically involves animal capture which can be difficult, especially where the species is elusive or when population densities are low. Once located, site factors and an animal's position, often, in the case of koalas, in the tops of trees exceeding 30 metres in height within rugged terrain, may also limit accessibility and make capture difficult or impossible. Animal capture is usually followed by invasive procedures such as anaesthesia and the collection of urogenital or ocular swabs, tissue biopsies or blood extraction. These methods require veterinarians and/or specialist expertise, making widespread sampling costly and time consuming. Due to difficulties in sampling wild animals, the prevalence of pathogens is often determined using samples of convenience such as deceased individuals (e.g. roadkill) or those admitted to veterinary clinics or wildlife shelters. Though a subset of the wild population, the prevalence of infectious agents may be greater in the portion of the population that has met with misadventure or is unwell (entering shelters or clinics) compared to the overall wild population. Therefore, this type of sampling has the potential to lead to a biased result, which may not be indicative of the true prevalence of the pathogen within the wider population.
As in other marsupials, both male and female koalas have a cloaca, a common external opening to the urogenital and gastrointestinal tracts (Archer et al. 1987). It therefore seems probable that dead Chlamydia infected cells and shed infectious particles (elementary bodies) may be detected in genetic material sourced from koala scats. The ability to carry out microsatellite genotyping using koala DNA isolated from scats (Wedrowicz et al. 2013) suggests that it should also be possible to detect KoRV in infected epithelial cells. In koalas originating from Queensland, the ability to detect endogenous KoRV (where all cells will contain at least one KoRV copy) in DNA isolated from koala scats has been demonstrated by Miyazawa et al. (2011). However, the ability to detect exogenous KoRV infections (in scat isolated DNA), where all somatic cells are not infected, is less certain. Given evidence that a large proportion of Victorian koalas may only carry horizontally acquired, exogenous KoRV infections (Simmons et al. 2012), this is important to determine.
The detection of koala pathogens in non-invasively sourced DNA could provide a viable alternative to invasive sampling. The ability to detect C. pecorum and KoRV in DNA isolated from koala scats would be a valuable tool with the potential to facilitate and expedite the collection of prevalence data for these infections across the koala's range. The objective of this study, therefore, is to determine whether C. pecorum and KoRV-A DNA can be detected in genetic material non-invasively sourced from koala scats, providing a tool that can assess the presence of these pathogens in wild koala populations.

[SECTION] sample collection and dna isolation
Scat samples were collected from six koalas in the Strzelecki Ranges, Victoria during March 2015. The six individual koalas from which scats were collected were also captured as part of an independent study carried out by the NSW Office of Environment and Heritage (Allen 2015). The purpose of the study carried out by Allen (2015) was to determine the prevalence of chlamydial infections in the Strzelecki Ranges koala population by capturing and collecting ocular and urogenital swabs from koalas. Results obtained from DNA isolated from urogenital swabs (six koalas: K01-K06) collected for the Allen (2015) study allowed direct comparison of C. pecorum presence detected by both methods. Scats located on the ground beneath each koala captured by Allen (2015) were collected for the isolation of DNA according to the methods described by Wedrowicz et al. (2013). To assess detection reproducibility in DNA isolated from scats from the same individual, DNA was isolated from three different scats collected beneath each koala, resulting in three DNA isolates per individual. The concentration of total DNA isolated from scats was determined using the Qubit Ò 2.0 Fluorometer following the manufacturer's instructions.
Presence/absence assay for C. pecorum Real time assays for C. pecorum targeting a 76 bp region of the ompA gene were carried out as per Pantchev et al. (2010). Reactions also incorporated TaqMan Ò Exogenous Internal Positive Control (IPC) Reagents in order to differentiate failed reactions, due to PCR inhibition, from true negative results. Amplification was carried out using the Applied Biosystems Step One Plus instrument using a presence absence protocol. PCR product using primers amplifying 1140 bp of the ompA gene (details below: ompA gene sequencing) was used to prepare 1:10 serial dilutions for standards ranging from 8 9 10 0 -8 9 10 6 copies per reaction. Standards were used to assess reaction sensitivity including an IPC, as well as to estimate the number of chlamydial DNA copies in different samples. A standard PCR to determine the gender of the sampled individual was also carried out using DNA isolated from scats as outlined in Wedrowicz et al. (2013).

[SECTION] ompa gene sequencing
The presence of C. pecorum in samples which tested positive via real time PCR was confirmed by amplification of 1140 bp of the ompA gene. Amplification of ompA was carried out using BIO-X-ACT TM Short DNA Polymerase  (Bioline). Reactions consisted of 19 OptiBuffer, 19 Hi-Spec additive, 2 mM MgCl 2 , 0.5 mM each dNTP, 1 unit of BIO-X-ACT Short DNA Polymerase and 0.25 lM of each primer (ompAfor and ompArev; Kollipara et al. 2013) made up to 20 lL with water. DNA was initially denatured for 5 min at 95 °C, followed by 40 cycles of 95 °C for 30 s, 54 °C for 30 s and 72 °C for 1 min each and ending with a single final extension of 7 min at 72 °C. PCR products were purified using the Wizard Ò SV Gel and PCR Clean-Up System (Promega) and sequencing was carried out by the Australian Genome Research Facility (AGRF), Melbourne, Victoria. Resulting sequences were trimmed using Sequence Scanner V2 (Applied Biosystems) and nucleotide BLAST (NCBI 2016) used to determine the similarity of sequences to those previously reported. Genotypes were classified according to Kollipara et al. (2013), where ompA sequences with less than 1 % nucleotide differences to previously reported sequences were designated by the same genotype letter followed by a prime symbol and a number to differentiate multiple variants with minimal base pair differences.

[SECTION] comparison of scat and urogenital results
Results of C. pecorum presence in DNA isolated from scats were compared to C. pecorum presence in urogenital swabs obtained by Allen (2015). Results reported by Allen (2015) were determined independently by the Koala Health Hub (KHH) at The University of Sydney, New South Wales, Australia. DNA isolated from swabs testing positive for C. pecorum were provided for this study by the KHH allowing amplification and sequencing of the ompA gene to be carried out for swab isolated DNA as described above.

[SECTION] sample collection and dna isolation
Koala scat samples were collected from wild individuals in the Strzelecki Ranges, South Gippsland (n = 17), Raymond Island (n = 2) and from koalas at the Koala Conservation Centre (n = 6) on Phillip Island, all in Victoria (total VIC samples; n = 25) (Fig. 1). Koala scats were also obtained from the Port Macquarie Koala Hospital in New South Wales (NSW, n = 15). Scats were collected and DNA isolated according to the methods outlined in Wedrowicz et al. (2013). To compare the results from scat samples with those from a commonly utilised invasive DNA source, DNA was also isolated from ear tissue samples (n = 50) from deceased individuals, collected by staff at the Southern Ash Wildlife Shelter (SAWS), Rawson, Victoria. Approximately 3 mm square was excised from ear samples and cut into small pieces. DNA was then isolated using the DNeasy Ò Blood & Tissue Kit (Qiagen) following the manufacturer's protocol.

[SECTION] korv-a pcr
Standard PCRs utilised KoRV-A specific primers published in Xu et al. (2013) alongside koala b-actin primers (Markey et al. 2007) to confirm the presence of koala DNA. Standard PCRs for KoRV-A were made up of 5 lL GoTaq Ò Green Master Mix (Promega), 1.0 lM of each KoRV-A primer, 0.1 lg bovine serum albumin (BSA), 1 lL of DNA template and water to give a final volume of 10 lL. PCR cycling parameters were 95 °C for 2 min followed by 35 cycles of 95 °C for 30 s, 64 °C for 30 s and 72 °C for 30 s followed by a final extension of 72 °C for 5 min. Standard PCR for koala b-actin consisted of 5 lL GoTaq Ò Green Master Mix, 1.0 lM of each KoRV-A primer, 0.1 lg BSA, 1 lL of DNA template and water to bring the final volume to 10 lL. PCR cycling parameters were 95 °C for 2 min followed by 35 cycles of 95 °C for 30 s, 60 °C for 30 s and 72 C for 30 s and finished with a final extension of 72 °C for 5 min. To ensure the lower sensitivity of standard PCR assays was not resulting in an increased number of false negatives, real time PCR assays, using the same primers specific for KoRV-A (Xu et al. 2013), were carried out by the KHH on the same set of samples (VIC and NSW, n = 40) tested by standard PCR to independently validate results. Real time PCRs were carried out on both undiluted and 1:10 dilutions of DNA isolates.
KoRV-A copy number DNA from tissues (n = 50) and additional scat samples (n = 117) collected in the South Gippsland region were also screened for KoRV (data not shown). Using a subset of randomly selected positive samples, KoRV copy number was compared between Victorian scat samples (VIC, n = 13) and ear tissue samples (TISS, n = 13) along with scat samples collected from New South Wales (NSW, n = 8). This was carried out using real time PCR with KoRV-A primers (Xu et al. 2013) and b-actin primers (Markey et al. 2007) to standardise copy number. Standards were produced for the KoRV-A and b-actin assays by amplifying the two targets using standard PCR. KoRV-A and b-actin PCR product was then purified using the Wizard Ò SV Gel and PCR Clean-Up System (Promega). Serial 1:10 dilutions ranging approximately from 10 0 to 10 6 copies of KoRV-A or b-actin PCR product were then used as standards for the estimation of copy number. Both PCRs were carried out using 10 lL of SYBR Ò Green Master Mix (Applied Biosystems), 0.25 lM of each primer and 2 lL of DNA template made up to a total of 20 lL with water and cycling parameters consisting of 50 °C for 2 min (UDG activation), 95 °C for 2 min (polymerase activation) followed by 50 cycles of 95 °C for 3 s and 60 °C for 30 s. A melt curve was produced to check for non-specific products. All standards, controls and samples were tested in duplicate.

[SECTION] korv-a sequencing
A subset of PCRs positive for KoRV (n = 6) were sequenced to confirm the detection of KoRV-A. Primers were designed using published KoRV-A sequence (Genbank AF151794.2; Hanger et al. 2000) and Primer-BLAST (Ye et al. 2012) to target a 1115 bp region of the KoRV env gene; primers were designated KoRV-env1-F (5 0 -AGACG GGAAGTGTCGTTTGG-3 0 ) and KoRV-env1-R (5 0 -GGG GGTGAGGCCAGAATTAC-3 0 ). Positive samples were amplified using 10 lL GoTaq Ò Green Master Mix, 0.5 lM of each primer and 0.1 lg BSA made up to a final volume of 20 lL. PCR products were purified using the ISOLATE PCR and Gel Kit (Bioline) and sequencing was carried out by AGRF.

[SECTION] assay sensitivity and reproducibility
The detection limit for the C. pecorum assay, with the addition of an internal positive control, was consistent with the limits reported by Pantchev et al. (2010) at eight copies of chlamydial DNA per PCR (Online resource 1, Fig. S1). C. pecorum DNA was detected in all three scats from each positive individual indicating that, when present, C. pecorum is consistently found in DNA isolated from koala scats. The total number of C. pecorum copies detected in DNA isolated from urogenital swabs was much higher compared to scats (Table 1). Results obtained from scat or urogenital swab isolated DNA were generally concordant (Table 2), but, one of the six scat DNA isolates was positive for C. pecorum while the urogenital swab was negative (K06).

[SECTION] c. pecorum copy number and dna concentration
DNA isolated from scats ranged in concentration from 1.4 ng/lL up to 42 ng/lL (Table 1; Fig. 2). The estimated copy number of C. pecorum increased with increasing DNA concentration (Fig. 2). Different scats from the same individual were consistently either positive or negative, though there was variation in the number of C. pecorum copies detected for independent scats from the same individual (Table 1). Of the fifteen DNA samples isolated from scats positive for C. pecorum, twelve had less than 10 C. pecorum copies per ng of DNA isolated while the remaining three samples had somewhat higher copy numbers; 15, 37 and 74 C. pecorum copies per ng of DNA (Table 1). Compared to DNA isolated from scats for each individual, C. pecorum copy number was on average, three (K02), ten (K01 and K04), and 3000 (K05) times greater in DNA isolated from swabs. ompA genotypes detected using DNA isolated from scats and swabs
Of the five Chlamydia positive samples detected using DNA isolated from scats, four were successfully sequenced at ompA with two different genotypes being detected (Table 2). Referring to the types reported by Kollipara et al. (2013), genotypes were most closely related to ompA types F (K01, K02 and K06; F 0 3, n = 3, two bases difference to genotype F, both non-synonymous) and C (K04; C 0 1, n = 1, one base difference, synonymous). Each of the four positive urogenital swab samples produced different ompA sequences to one another (Table 2). These included F 0 3 (K01) and C 0 1 (K04), both of which matched the sequences obtained from counterpart scat samples. An ompA sequence 100 % identical to genotype F described by Kollipara et al. (2013) was detected in the swab sample of koala K05, but the ompA sequence obtained for K05 using scat isolated DNA could not be read, possibly due to the presence of multiple strains. The remaining swab sample (K02) was identified as genotype M (Legione et al. 2016) and differed to the corresponding ompA sequence from the paired scat isolated DNA (F 0 3). The ompA sequence (genotype M) obtained from swab DNA for individual K02 was noted to have some level background sequence while all other sequences were completely free of any background noise.

[SECTION] comparison between standard and real time pcr results
The DNA concentration isolated from the 40 scat samples tested for KoRV presence ranged from undetectable (\0.10 ng/lL, n = 3 NSW samples) to 41 ng/lL with a mean of 4.2 ng/lL and median of 1.2 ng/lL (Online resource 1: Table S2). Standard PCR results (undiluted template) were identical to the real time PCR results (undiluted template), except for three (12.5 %) South Gippsland positives which tested negative by real time PCR when isolates were diluted 1:10 (Online resource 1: Table S2). KoRV-A was detected in 24 of the 40 samples tested (60 %). Using both standard and real time PCR all six Phillip Island samples tested in this study were negative for KoRV while all 15 NSW samples tested positive. As expected, b-actin and KoRV-A cycle thresholds decreased with increasing amounts of total DNA concentration obtained from koala scats (Fig. 3), indicating greater amounts of koala and KoRV DNA present in DNA isolates with higher DNA concentration.

[SECTION] confirmation of korv-a presence by sequencing
A 1115 bp segment of the KoRV env gene was sequenced for a subset of positive samples to confirm the detection of KoRV DNA. Sequences of samples from NSW koalas (n = 2) were 100 % identical to KoRV-A sequence (AF151794.2; Hanger et al. 2000). All samples from Victorian koalas that were sequenced (n = 4) had six identical nucleotide base changes in the env segment. The six polymorphisms in the Victorian samples were all synonymous, not having an effect on the amino acid sequence of the env gene.

[SECTION] differences in korv-a copy number between sample groups
Quantitative PCR revealed significant differences in copy number between scat samples from NSW and Victoria. On average, more than four KoRV-A copies per genomic unit were detected in scats sampled in NSW, whereas less than one copy per genomic unit was detected in Victorian scat samples (Fig. 3; p = 0.01). This is concordant with results reported by Simmons et al. (2012) further supporting the hypothesis that most infections in Victoria are exogenous, as endogenous proviral DNA would be expected to be present in every cell if acquired vertically via the germline. Simmons et al. (2012) showed that KoRV is endogenous in northern koala populations, and is inserted into the genome multiple times, with an average of 165 KoRV copies per cell reported for Queensland individuals; the mean of four KoRV copies per genomic unit value reported for NSW koalas in this study is substantially lower. KoRV-A copy number also differed significantly between scat and ear tissue samples collected in South Gippsland, with scats having on average, 30 times as many KoRV-A copies per ) while the KoRV-A PCR had a regression fit of C T = 31.6-2.9 log 10 DNA (R 2 = 26 %, p = 1.9 9 10 -4 ) genomic unit than tissue samples (Fig. 4; p \ 0.0005). KoRV-A in DNA isolated from ear tissue averaged 0.003 ± 0.002 copies per genomic unit while DNA isolated from scats had a mean of 0.09 ± 0.01 KoRV-A copies per genomic unit.

[SECTION] discussion
Pathogenic organisms can impact wild animal populations by reducing animal health, longevity and the ability to successfully reproduce. Impacts such as these may result in decreased population size causing losses in genetic diversity (Frankham et al. 2012) which, together with other threatening processes such as habitat loss and fragmentation, may greatly increase the risk of inbreeding, deleterious genes and extirpation. Given declines in koala numbers and the 2012 listing of northern koala populations as vulnerable under the Environmental Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (Department of the Environment 2015) it is imperative that the prevalence of C. pecorum and KoRV within the koala population is determined. Obtaining such data via swabs however, can be costly and time consuming, especially for species such as the koala, which are difficult to capture. DNA isolated from a single scat can provide information on the presence and characteristics of C. pecorum and KoRV. Both C.
pecorum and KoRV were detected in DNA isolated from koala scats. The non-invasive collection of samples therefore has potential to greatly increase sample size in studies of koala pathogens, without the requirements of capturing, handling or even observing an animal. This allows for the collection of more samples from wider and more diverse geographic areas, increasing both the spatial distribution and number of samples obtained for studies of pathogens in wildlife. Such data is critical for effective species management, especially in the case of inter-population translocations or releases proposed by wildlife managers or carers.
In Australia, the translocation of wild animals is common, with 54 species (*14 %) of Australian mammals having at least one documented translocation (Short 2010). Additional undocumented movements of animals carried out by wildlife carers releasing individuals after rehabilitation are also commonplace in Australia (Guy and Banks 2012;Reid 2014). Translocations are often carried out for conservation reasons, however the risk of transferring pathogens between endemic and introduced individuals is an important consideration that requires prior assessment (Leighton 2002) and post translocation surveillance (Mathews et al. 2006). Severe Chlamydia infections are more likely in individual koalas not previously exposed to these bacterial infections (Martin and Handasyde 1990b). The inadvertent introduction of C. pecorum to populations that have historically been free of infection, therefore, has the potential to result in devastating consequences. The effects of exposure to novel strains are also important considerations due to possible differences in strain pathogenicity (Mohamad et al. 2008(Mohamad et al. , 2014)). Although the pathogenic effects of KoRV are not entirely clear at present, preventing transmission of the virus to KoRV free populations is important. Obtaining baseline data on KoRV prevalence in wild populations will enable monitoring of infection rates and future changes that may occur.
C. pecorum has also been found to infect other Australian marsupials such as the greater glider (Petauroides volans), the short-eared brushtail possum (Trichosurus caninus) and the western barred bandicoot (Perameles bougainville) (Bodetti et al. 2003). Other than the koala, limited research into the effects of this pathogen on marsupial populations has been carried out. Given that urogenital infections with Chlamydia may be subclinical, yet affect reproduction, the presence of this bacteria in marsupial populations may potentially be an under recognised cause of population declines. The use of scat sourced DNA could provide a simple and useful method for screening and characterising Chlamydia infections in a range of marsupial species. Similarly, a retrovirus similar to KoRV and GALV has been detected in an Australian rodent, Melomys burtoni (Simmons et al. 2014). Using DNA sourced non-invasively from scats, sampling power and the ability to identify other potential retroviral hosts and/or cross species transmissions may be greatly increased. This method could therefore also be of value to the study of these bacterial and viral pathogens in other Australian marsupials. Screening for potential pathogens, utilising non-invasive genetic sampling techniques as described here, may be a useful addition to studies of other mammals. This study demonstrates that C. pecorum strains, also found to cause urogenital infection in koalas (Kollipara et al. 2013;Legione et al. 2016), can be detected in DNA isolated from koala scats. It is important to recognise that infection with C. pecorum does not mean that an individual will have symptoms of chlamydiosis. The presence of C. pecorum does, however, provide an indication that the individual carries the pathogen and is probably capable of transmitting the bacteria to other individuals. Conversely, a negative result does not necessarily show that the individual is free of infection, since latent infections or low level shedding of infectious particles could result in too few C. pecorum particles present on koala scats for detection.
Results of the C. pecorum assay were largely concordant between scat and swab samples, although some differences were also noted. One individual (K06) tested positive for C. pecorum in DNA isolated from scats and negative using DNA isolated from the urogenital swab. This may indicate that insufficient biological material was obtained during swabbing or that infected cells detected in scat DNA were located at other reported sites of chlamydial infection such as the gastrointestinal tract (Burach et al. 2014). Another explanation is that scats were from another koala having visited the same tree rather than the koala captured; genotyping of both the scat and swab DNA isolates would be required to confirm or exclude this possibility. The ompA genotype obtained for one individual (K02) differed between scat and swab samples; the scat sample providing the F 0 3 genotype and the swab sample the M genotype. The M genotype sequence obtained from this swab was however the only sequence with a substantial amount of background, potentially indicating the presence of multiple strains or alternatively, sample contamination. Further investigation is needed to determine whether differences in the ompA type detected using different sample types from the same individual is due to the collection of scats from unintended individuals, as described above, or to multiple strain infections, potentially located at different anatomical sites (Burach et al. 2014). For example, infections of the gastrointestinal tract may be present in scat samples, but absent from urogenital swab samples.
Compared to DNA isolated from swabs, the number of C. pecorum copies detected in scat DNA was much lower and the number of estimated C. pecorum copies varied between DNA samples isolated from independent scats from the same individual. Although positive samples were consistently positive across the three separate scats, it is possible that the bacteria may not be detected when the rate of shedding of infectious particles is low. Copy number variability was at least, in part, related to the concentration of DNA obtained from scats. Further work to determine the minimum quantity of total DNA needed for reliable detection of C. pecorum in DNA isolated from scats, from individuals with various infectious loads, would be appropriate. Testing multiple independent scats from the same individual may increase confidence in results obtained. The only male koala included in this study (individual K05) was estimated to have a C. pecorum copy number that was between 2200 and 4500 times lower in DNA sourced from scats compared to DNA sourced from swabs, while the females in the study had copy numbers in scats that were between one and fifty times lower. Differences in the anatomy of female and male koalas could potentially affect the ability to detect C. pecorum in males and female scats; this requires further investigation.
Compared to Victorian tissue samples, significantly greater amounts of KoRV-A were detected in DNA isolated from Victorian scat samples (Fig. 4). This difference suggests the possible detection of infection acquired horizontally (exogenous infection) in Victorian koalas. All northern NSW samples in this study tested positive for KoRV, while no samples were KoRV positive in the Phillip Island group of samples. This is consistent with results previously reported by Simmons et al. (2012), who found all Phillip Island (Victoria) samples tested to be KoRV negative and all samples tested in the Port Macquarie (NSW) area to be KoRV positive. Apart from one sample, standard and real time PCR assays of the samples tested here produced equivalent results. Where presence or absence of KoRV is all that is required for a study, standard PCR can also provide useful data. The small number of diluted positive samples that tested negative by real time PCR indicates that KoRV may not be detected when DNA concentration is quite low. One way to address this may be to screen DNA samples for quantity and quality in order to ascertain the suitability of samples for testing. Additionally, if KoRV detected in scat isolated DNA originates from exogenous infections, the number of cells in which KoRV DNA has integrated may be highly variable, resulting in low copy numbers in some samples. Consequently, until further information is obtained, presence only studies are likely to be most suitable using these methods. In Victorian samples, higher KoRV-A copy number was found in DNA isolated from scats compared to ear tissue, suggesting that koala scats provide a practical source of DNA for detecting the presence of KoRV infections acquired both vertically and horizontally.
Koala conservation research will benefit from the use of an integrated approach, employing the relatively simple method for detecting C. pecorum and KoRV described here. Genetic material isolated from koala scats has been shown to provide DNA that can be reliably used to obtain genotypic data, DNA sequence information and to identify gender (Wedrowicz et al. 2013). DNA isolated from scats can provide information on population substructure, relatedness between individuals, gene flow, migration and hybridisation using genotyping (Czarnomska et al. 2013;Piggott et al. 2006;Stenglein et al. 2011). The gender of the individual sampled can be determined by PCR (Wedrowicz et al. 2013), while sequencing of mitochondrial DNA can provide phylogenetic information suitable for evolutionary analyses (Houlden et al. 1999). Genotypic data can also be paired with habitat and environmental models to look for factors that may impede or facilitate gene flow across the landscape using landscape genetics (Storfer et al. 2006).
The ability to detect pathogens in DNA isolated from koala scats may supply critical information that can be combined with genetic data to provide a multidimensional picture of koala biology. Since pathogen DNA sequences can be obtained using this method, non-invasive sampling may also permit studies of pathogen diversity, transmission and spread throughout wild populations. In the case of C. pecorum, the likelihood of particular C. pecorum strains having high or low virulence could also be investigated using ompA markers along with additional C. pecorum DNA markers such as incA and ORF663 (Mohamad et al. 2014). A general trend of increased C. pecorum shedding has been shown for individuals with increasing severity of chlamydial disease (Wan et al. 2011) and there is also evidence of differing infectious load between C. pecorum strains (Legione et al. 2016). It may, therefore, also be useful to differentiate individuals with high or low loads of C. pecorum using DNA isolated from scats. However, further comparisons of copy number between swabs and scats would be required in order to more accurately gauge the variability of C. pecorum copy number in scat isolated DNA and the number of scats needed to give a reliable estimate of infectious load. Pathogen detection from scats could be paired with ecological studies, thereby revealing whether infection might have an effect on behaviour or movement. This information has the potential to provide increased knowledge of many aspects of C. pecorum and KoRV infection in koala populations including transmission, pathogenicity and host effects. Together, the plethora of information that is able to be gained from a single koala scat can be used to promote a holistic approach to koala conservation and management.

