[SECTION] title
Does kinship affect spatial organization in a small and isolated population of a solitary felid: the Eurasian lynx?

[SECTION] abstract
Social organization in wild carnivores is mostly determined by patterns of family bonds, which may shape the degree of relatedness among individuals in the population. We studied kinship in a small and isolated population of a solitary carnivore, the Eurasian lynx (Lynx lynx) to evaluate its effect on spatial distribution of individuals. We investigated the relationship between spatial location and pair-wise kinship among 28 lynx individuals identified in 2004-2011 by telemetry, noninvasive sampling and genotyping with the use of 12 autosomal microsatellites in the Białowieża Primeval Forest, Poland . The average relatedness of the lynx population was relatively low (Lynch and Ritland's R =0.03). Females were significantly more related to each other than males with other males. The inferred pedigree showed that the population was dominated by only two familial groups. We did not find significant correlations between the relatedness and the extent of home range overlap or the straight-line distances between the home ranges' central points. These results suggest that the dynamics of kinship in this solitary felid may not differ from the random mating processes described in social carnivores. Although the chances of random mating could be limited to a few resident males and females, the presence of unrelated floaters may provide a "breeding buffer" that may prevent an increase of relatedness and likely inbreeding in the population. This system is likely to fail in preserving genetic diversity in small, highly isolated populations, therefore restoring habitat connectivity is crucial to ensure sufficient immigration from neighboring populations.

[SECTION] introduction
Spatial distribution of individuals in the populations of mammals is an outcome of several factors including population size density and social organization, but also the quality and distribution of available habitat (Waser 1988). The same factors are also major causes responsible for shaping the genetic variation within and between populations (Liu et al. 2013). Among them very important, socially related features, are dispersal and philopatry patterns which are also considered to be part of the inbreeding avoidance mechanism (Pusey & Wolf 1996). Another social factor that may prevent breeding with close relatives and thus affect the genetic diversity is kin recognition.
However, the ability to recognize and avoid kin as mates may vary with the social system (Pusey & Wolf 1996), and should be particularly well developed in species that live in family groups (Geffen et al. 2011). Nevertheless, some studies on gregarious carnivores suggested that social mechanisms do not always contribute to maintain low kinship values in populations, and that dispersal is driven by competition for food resources rather than inbreeding avoidance (Packer et al. 1991;Lehman et al. 1992;Keane et al.1996;Gompper et al. 1998). Consequently, inbreeding may not necessarily be avoided at least in gregarious mammals (Keane et al. 1996;Nichols et al. 2014).
In contrast to group-living mammals, the solitary species that do not form long-lasting family bonds, could be expected to be less prone to interact with related individuals during their life-time.
However, data on the role of kinship in shaping the spatial relationships in populations of typical, solitary mammals are rare. The majority of felids live solitarily with a population structure based on territoriality (Sunquist & Sunquist 2004). Therefore, their social organization through male-biased dispersal may efficiently promote intolerance towards relatives, yielding low kinship values in the population. On the other hand, it is relatively common in felids that females tolerate their female offspring within their territories (Bailey 1993;Smith 1993;Poole 1995), which may favor increasing the relatedness among females. However, following Jamieson et al. (2009) argumentation, in species with low encounter rates between close kin (such as in solitary felids) inbreeding avoidance may not be favored due to the high costs associated with searching an unrelated mate. Thus it is not yet clear what mechanisms may work in solitary felids in maintaining the population genetic diversity.
Due to the direct link between kinship and genetic variability in a population, the Eurasian lynx (Lynx lynx) is a good model species for studying this relationship. Rates of gene flow among lynx population fragments have been found to be limited, leading to sharp genetic structuring (Hellborg et al. 2002;Rueness et al. 2003;Ratkiewicz et al. 2012). Rueness et al. (2003) hypothesized that the strict territorial character of lynx social structure and their home range fidelity may hamper gene flow thus maintaining a high genetic differentiation. Partial support for this hypothesis was reported by Janecka et al. (2006) and Diefenbach et al. (2006) for a related species, the bobcat (Lynx rufus), which showed that home range residency is a prerequisite to successful reproduction, which implies that immigrants are not easily integrated into a recipient population. An additional limitation is habitat fragmentation at the periphery of the Eurasian lynx range, which results in decreasing local genetic variability (Schmidt et al. 2009;2011). These factors create favorable conditions for maintaining high relatedness in the population. The issue of inbreeding and likely resulting inbreeding depression are of particularly high concern in small and isolated populations of wildlife (Liberg et al. 2005;Raikkonen et al. 2009), thus, knowledge on the relationship between the spatial distribution of individuals within the populations and the degree of their relatedness is desirable in case of rare and threatened species or populations.
We studied kinship in the protected population of Eurasian lynx inhabiting fairly isolated habitat -the Białowieża Primeval Forest (BPF), Poland. As this population was characterized by low genetic variability and high genetic divergence from neighboring populations (Ratkiewicz et al. 2012;2014) and small size (Davoli et al. 2013), we wanted to analyze how kinship may affect the spatial structure of this felid constrained by high genetic isolation and limited habitat connectivity. By studying the spatial distribution of lynx individuals with associated information on their inferred genetic relatedness we aimed to better understand the mechanisms shaping the degree of relatedness, and genetic diversity in a representative of solitary carnivores. We predicted that relatedness should not determine the spatial distribution of lynx individuals in the BPF population particularly in relation to its small size and isolated character.

[SECTION] study area
We carried out this study in the Białowieża Primeval Forest (BPF, 52º30'-53º00' N, 23º30'-24º15' E), located in Eastern Poland on the Polish-Belarussian border. The BPF is a temperate mixedlowland forest, characterized by a high percentage of natural stands (Faliński 1986). It constitutes a relatively well distinguished patch of forest habitat within the matrix of human-dominated land (Fig. 1). The total area of the forest is 1500 km 2 , but only 600 km 2 is on the Polish side. The Polish part of the forest consists of fragments under various protection regimes, including the Białowieża National Park (BNP, 100 km 2 ) with a 50 km 2 of a strictly protected zone, a network of nature reserves covering nearly 180 km 2 and the remaining part managed by the state forestry. The area is flat and easily accessible for vehicles by a dense network of dirt roads that usually follow a regular grid of square forest compartments (approx. 1 x 1 km). The average temperature during the study was -3.9º C in the winter (December-March) and 19.1º C in the summer (June-September). Snow cover persisted for an average of 96 days per year from November to March.
In 1994, the lynx population in the Polish part of BPF was estimated by snow-and radiotracking at 29 individuals (Jędrzejewski et al. 1996). However, despite being fully protected since 1995 the population apparently decreased by about 30-35% in 200330-35% in -200630-35% in (Schmidt 2008)). Due to an isolated character of the BPF and high reliance of lynx on the forest cover (Podgórski et al. 2008), this population comprises a relatively isolated entity, which is sharply genetically distinct from neighboring populations (Schmidt et al. 2009;Ratkiewicz et al., 2012).

[SECTION] monitoring the spatial distribution of lynx individuals
We collected data on lynx spatial distribution by two supplementary methods: live-trapping for the telemetry monitoring and genotyping of hair samples obtained by hair-trapping (Schmidt & Kowalczyk 2006;Davoli et al. 2013). For this study we used spatial data on a total of 28 individuals: 11 live-trapped and 17 hair-trapped (see Appendix 1).

[SECTION] telemetry
Five male and six female lynx were live-trapped using either foot-snare traps (Breitenmoser 1989) set at fresh ungulate kills or wooden box-traps (Kolbe et al. 2003) and monitored with telemetry in 2004 -2011. The traps were equipped with radio-alarm systems (Wagener Telemetrieanlagen HF-NF Technik, Köln, Germany and Abratronik, Wrocław, Poland) that allowed us to remotely control trapping and minimize the time animals spent in the traps. Lynx were immobilized by a mixture of ketamine hydrochloride (5 mg/kg of body weight) and xylazine hydrochloride (6 mg/kg of body weight). The effect of xylazine was reversed with atipamezole hydrochloride (0.5 mg/kg). The age of live trapped lynx was estimated at the time of capture by a method based on canine gum recession developed for mountain lions (Puma concolor) (Laundré et al. 2000). To estimate the rate of growth of lynx teeth we used the canine measurements of a lynx male (not genotyped for this study) twice captured in BPF (in 2004 and2011;authors' unpublished data).
Ten lynx were equipped with VHF radio-collars (Wagener Telemetrieanlagen, Germany) and one male (Lly28) was fitted with a GPS collar (Vectronic, Germany). The collars weighed approximately 230-280 g (1-2% of the lynx body mass). Blood samples (1 ml) for genetic analyses were drawn from a radial vein with an EDTA vacutainer, and stored frozen at -20°C.
All collared lynx, except Lly28, were radio-tracked with standard VHF telemetry. We aimed to obtain one location during the day and one at late evening every day, however, approximately 20% of searches failed due to the large size of a lynx home range. Locations taken by triangulation were superimposed onto topographic maps with a 1 : 50000 scale, and recorded to the nearest 50 m. The only GPS collar (Lly28) was set to obtain four locations per day (three during the most active time from 21:00 to 03:00 and one at midday). In total, 2579 telemetry locations were collected with an average of 247 per individual. Lynx were radio-tracked from 1 to 27 months with an average of 14.9 months per individual. Six radio-tracked lynx were also monitored genetically by hair-sampling, with four of them recorded by this means already before the radio-tracking period. This increased their total monitoring time to 4-6 years (Appendix 1). From among the remaining five radio-tracked lynx that were not recorded by hair-sampling, four individuals were trapped two years after terminating the hair-trapping study (although based on their age at least three of them could have potentially existed in the population during hair-trapping) and one was a female kitten (11 months old) that died one month after trapping.The license for lynx live-trapping and blood sampling was obtained from the National Ethics Committee for Animal Experiments (no: DB/KKE/PL -110/2001) and the Local Ethics Committee for Animal Experiments at the Medical University of Białystok (no: 52/2007).

[SECTION] non-invasive sampling
Hair-trapping was conducted in 2004-2006 using a hair-sampling system developed for Canada lynx (McDaniel et al. 2000) and modified for the Eurasian lynx, as described in detail by Schmidt and Kowalczyk (2006). We placed hair-traps (8 x 8 cm pieces of carpet supplied with 10 nails) directly on the objects identified by snow-tracking as being scent-marked by lynx. The hairtrapping sites were spaced at 1-2 km intervals and distributed along forest roads in the entire Polish part of BPF (Fig. 1). To evoke cheek-rubbing in lynx we applied to each trap a mixture of beaver castoreum and catnip oil (Schmidt & Kowalczyk 2006). We conducted the surveys in 2004-2006, at different times of year and in sessions lasting 7-13 weeks, with 36-113 (mean ± SD = 85.2 ± 29.0) scent-stations per session, but the majority of samples (73%) were collected in winter-spring months (December -April). As this period includes the mating season in lynx (Schmidt et al. 1997) it warrants highest probability of detecting both males and females widely ranging during this time.
Considering the average size of lynx home ranges in BPF, there were approximately 30 traps distributed per home range. We attempted to check and re-bait hair-traps every 10-14 days though the actual range of intervals was 1-23 days. Hairs were dried at a temperature 30-40ºC and stored in paper envelopes at room temperature, in plastic boxes with silica gel (following Wasser et al. 1997;Roon et al. 2003).

[SECTION] genotyping methodology
In total, 349 lynx-hair samples were collected during the study. However, only 170 samples provided enough (>10) hairs with roots for genetic analyses. We analysed 11 blood samples collected from live-trapped lynx. The DNA extraction and amplification were undertaken following the protocol described by Davoli et al. (2013). Individuals were genotyped using 12 autosomal microsatellite loci, which were originally described in the domestic cat (Menotti-Raymond et al. 1999). See Appendix 2 for details of the genetic protocols. The PCR products were obtained for 96 hair samples of which 85.4% provided reliable genotypes. Twenty four reliable hair-genotypes were determined from among all the hair-samples, but we excluded from spatial analyses the unsexed individual. The hair-determined genotypes were resampled on average 3.9 times (range: 1 -14).
More than half of the genotypes (14/24) were re-sampled 3-14 times, whilst the others were sampled only once.

[SECTION] spatial analyses
To minimize a bias potentially resulting from small sample size we adopted two approaches for the spatial analyses: 1) calculation of the degree (%) of overlap between home ranges and 2) measurement of distances between the centers of home ranges or locations of single-sample hair genotypes. With this double-checking we aimed at ensuring higher certainty of obtained results with a maximum use of collected data. The spatial analyses were done with the Biotas TM software.
To estimate the overlap between home ranges we combined data from the telemetry and hair-trapped genotypes. According to our previous study, although the hair-trapping does not allow for reliable estimation of the actual home range size, the problem of low sample size can be partly compensated by its simultaneous use with other methods, such as telemetry (Davoli et al. 2013). Thus, we applied following additional procedure to minimize possible underestimation of home range size with hair sampling: 1) we considered only the hair-trapped genotypes represented by minimum 4 samples; 2) we excluded from the overlap analyses two genotypes which were recorded within an area smaller than 10 km 2 despite being represented by more than 4 samples; 3) in result of this selection only three hair-genotyped lynx individuals (whose home ranges were estimated at 49.1, 129.8 and 184.6 km 2 ) were used for overlap analyses. The number of locations considered for home range estimation in the case of lynx monitored with telemetry ranged from 10 (a single female kitten that died during dispersal one month after trapping) to 453. We estimated home range sizes using the 100% Minimum Convex Polygon method. We calculated an average overlap for each lynx pair according to following formula: (Ov/hr1+Ov/hr2)/2 x 100, where hr1 and hr2 are the home range sizes and Ov is the area of overlap between the ranges. We analyzed the association between the home range overlap (between both radio-tracked and hair-sampled individuals) and relatedness for a total of 14 individuals, but only 57 lynx pairs provided sufficient data for analyses due the procedure of data selection as mentioned above.
To measure distances between lynx we used two sets of data. Firstly, we calculated the harmonic mean centers of home ranges using the Biotas TM software (for both the radio-tracked and multi-sample, hair-trapped individuals). Secondly, we used the locations of single-sampled hairgenotypes and considered them as the centers of their home ranges. As we were aware that single location may incidentally occur at the edge of the home range, and thus potentially introducing a bias for the true distances between the home range centers we tested for the effect of sample size on the pair-wise distances. We compared three sets of distances data: 1) between pairs of lynx including at least one individual sampled at single location (mean ± SD = 14.89 ± 8.73 km, n = 95); 2) between pairs including at least one individual sampled at 3 to 10 locations (15.34 ± 8.72 km, n = 77) and 3) between pairs sampled at > 10 locations (17.46 ± 8.12 km, n = 52) with ANOVA and found no significant differences (F (2, 221) = 1.57, p>0.2,). We additionally selected a fourth set of distances data for those pairs including both single-sampled lynx (mean ± SD = 13.46 ± 8.46 km, n = 18) and ran ANOVA for all four groups of pair-wise distances and again obtained no significant differences (F = 1.41, p>0.2, df = 3). Therefore, we pooled both sets of data and measured the Euclidean distance between both types of points using the Biotas TM . We examined the relationship between distances and relatedness for a total of 225 pairs of lynx (28 individuals).
During the spatial analyses we used pairs of individuals or genotypes monitored in the same years, with the exception of pairs Lly02-Lly08 and Lly12-Lly31. The former case involved a likely father (a hair-trapped and radio-tracked male in 2005-2009) and son (the only hair-trapped male in 2004) with disjunctive home ranges. Based on the estimated age of Lly02 and his likely paternal bonds with Lly08, we assumed that he was also present in BPF during 2004 (Appendix 1). We undertook a similar assumption in the case of the Lly12-Lly31 pair -a likely mother (radio-tracked and hair-trapped in [2004][2005] and her daughter (radio-tracked in 2009-2010).

[SECTION] statistical analyses
We calculated basic genetic data (allelic frequencies, observed and expected unbiased heterozygosity, mean number of alleles per locus, departures from the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium and probability of identities) using the software GenAlEx 6.5b5 (Peakall & Smouse 2006: http://biology.anu.edu.au/GenAlEx). We calculated Wright's inbreeding estimator (F IS ) and pairwise linkage equilibrium (LD) using the software Genetix 4.05 (Belkhir et al.1996(Belkhir et al. -2004: : http://kimura.univ-montp2.fr/genetix).
To account for possible bias related to inferring the relatedness between genotypes of lynx we used different software to analyze the relationship between individuals in the population. We estimated pair-wise coefficients of relatedness based on the Lynch and Ritland (1999) method on the GenAlEx software and the maximum likelihood relatedness on the ML-Relate software (Kalinowski et al. 2006). The ML-relate procedure uses Milligan's (2003) maximum likelihood estimator. It calculates the probabilities that the given genotypes are observed on the assumption that the two individuals are parent-offspring/full-sibs/half-sibs/nonrelatives and these four relationships are evenly distributed in the population. However, it must be noted that the a'priori distribution of the four relationships is unknown and there is actually more than four possible relationships. Therefore, the inferred relationships should be treated with caution. The pedigree was reconstructed from the individual genotypes analysis using both Colony v. 2.0.5.0 (Jones & Wang 2009) and FRANz v. 2.0.0 (Riester et al. 2009). The FRANz reconstructed pedigree was drawn using Graphviz v. 2.34.
We tested the correlation between the relatedness coefficient (Lynch & Ritland 1999) and spatial distribution (both the degree of overlap and distance) in four sets of data: female-female, male-male, male-female and all lynx pooled. We performed the Mantel test (Mantel 1967) using the "zt" software (Bonnet & Van de Peer 2002) with the randomization of 100,000 iterations for all comparisons (with  set at 0.0005, adjusted to the number of iterations as suggested by the software). We used bootstrapping method (with1000 replications) to test for significance of differences in average relatedness between sex dyads with the COANCESTRY software v. 1.0.1.5 (Wang 2011). The differences in pair-wise distances and pair-wise overlap between the gender and kinship classes were tested with Kruskal-Wallis ANOVA. Both, GLM and ANOVA were conducted on the Statistica v. 9.1 software (StatSoft Inc.).
We also performed a spatial autocorrelation using the GenAlEx software with the "Single Pop" method, assuming a single population using a single genetic distance matrix. We assumed significance of the heterogeneity tests at the level of p<0.01, following Banks and Peakall (2012).

[SECTION] individual identifications and relatedness in the lynx population
We identified twenty eight lynx individuals (15 males and 13 females) by genotyping either the live-captured and radio-tracked lynx (in 2004 -2011) or hair-trapped samples (in 2004 -2006).
The 12 autosomal microsatellites amplified reliably either in blood and or hair-trapped samples with the average allelic drop out (ADO) and false allele (FA) rates 0.034 and 0.000 for invasive samples and 0.207 and 0.003 for non-invasive ones. Individual genotype reliability values ranged from 0.9 to 1.0. All microsatellites except of one (Fca023) were polymorphic, showing from 2 to 7 alleles per locus. The average observed and unbiased expected heterozygosity were H o = 0.540 (SE 0.073) and UH e = 0.506 (SE 0.062). All loci were in HWE at threshold p = 0.01. The individual genotypes differed by minimum 2 or more alleles, but only three genotype pairs (Lly03-Lly24, Lly13-Lly27 and Lly21-Lly31) differed at two loci and only one genotype pair (Lly12-Lly21) differed at three loci. The cumulative probability of identity values with 11 loci (the monomorphic locus Fca023 was excluded) were PID = 2.5 x 10 -7 and PID sibs = 1.1 x 10 -3 , suggesting that a "shadow effect" was unlikely. The 28 genotypes were used for analyses of relatedness and the spatial relationships between individuals.
Of these, 11 lynx (5M, 6F) were live trapped and radio-tracked. The period of monitoring these particular individuals, by combination of radio-tracking and hair-trapping, was from one to six years (mean 2.0 years). Average (±SD) relatedness (Lynch & Ritland 1999 estimator ranging from -∞ to +1) in the lynx population of Białowieża Primeval Forest for all pairs of individuals monitored in the same years (N = 225) was relatively low (-0.03±0.23; Table 1). The relatedness between females (0.05±0.23) was, however, significantly higher than between males and females (-0.06±0.25) (bootstrapping method: difference between means: 0.108; (95% CI: -0.077-0.095); p<0.05) (Table 1). There was no difference in average relatedness between other sex dyads (female-female : male-male difference: 0.076 (95% CI: -0.089 -0.097); male-female : male-male difference: 0.032 (95% CI: -0.065 -0.071); p>0.05).

[SECTION] pedigree analysis
From among 225 pairwise estimates of relatedness calculated with the ML-Relate software, 76.4% were found to be unrelated (Table 2). Only 10.7% of lynx pairs were identified as having parent-offspring relationships. Full siblings were identified in 4.4% of cases and half-siblings in 8.4% of cases. Among the 28 genotypes four groups of individuals interconnected by direct parentoffspring relationships were distinguished (Fig. 2). However, the majority of the population was dominated by only two of the parental-lines with one, originating from a pair MLly03-FLly12, being most numerous (35.7% of all genotypes). Within the largest parental line, mating occurred with different partners both in the case of male and female lynx (e.g. male MLly03 sired offspring with female FLly12, but he was also the father of two kittens with another unidentified female; female FLly12 except a kitten sired with MLly03 had three more offspring with another unsampled male Fig.

[SECTION] 2).
The parental relationships determined by FRANz (Fig. 2) were confirmed in five cases by Colony software (Fig. 2) and in ten cases by ML-Relate (Appendix 3). Colony identified three fathers and five mothers among all the possible pair-wise combinations of the 28 lynx genotypes (Fig. 1). On the other hand, the ML-Relate program failed to detect an evident mother-daughter relationship between the lynx Lly12 and Lly21, which were blood-sampled and radio-tracked simultaneously for a period of 50 days (Fig. 1 and2). It was, however, confirmed by both the FRANz and Colony software.

[SECTION] relationship between pair-wise relatedness and spatial distribution of lynx individuals
The average (±SD) distance between the centers of the harmonic mean home ranges of lynx pairs or the points of single-hair sampling was 15.7±8.6 km, while the home ranges overlapped on average by 20.9±23.5% for all pair-wise comparisons (Table 1). No differences between kinship classes (parent-offspring, full sibling, half sibling and unrelated) within sex groups (the same sex and male-female group) were found, neither in distance nor home range overlap (Table 2). There were also no differences between sex groups within particular kinship classes in either of the spatial indices.
The distribution of lynx pairs identified as parent-offspring within Białowieża Forest showed a random character, with some pairs occupying close locations and others distantly spaced regardless of the sex (Fig. 1). A slight, and insignificant, negative correlation between pair-wise distances and kinship was revealed by the Mantel test (Table 1) for all pairs of lynx. Interestingly, a negative, significant correlation between the pair-wise distance and relatedness was revealed in the case of male-female pairs (R=-0.27, p<0.00001, Table 1, cf. Fig. 3). This suggests that male and female lynx tend to stay closer to each other if they are closely related. On the other hand, no significant relationship between either the distance or the overlap and the relatedness was found in the remaining comparisons within the same sex or different sex subsamples (Table 1). Analysis of the spatial autocorrelation in GenAlEx has confirmed an insignificant relationship between the genetic relatedness and the pair-wise distance between lynx (Fig. 4).

[SECTION] discussion
Our study suggested that in a population of solitary felid confined to a small and isolated patch of habitat, spatial segregation is unlikely to play a role preventing encountering (and possibly mating) between close kin. As predicted, we found no dependence between individuals' spatial distribution and their relatedness. We acknowledge that with our non-invasive sampling we were not able to record the age of individuals at the time of hair-trapping, which would allow (more correctly) to focus on the relationships between the adult fraction of the population. Despite of this limitation our results provided an unique insight into the genetic consequences of spatial relationships among the lynx individuals at the level of a whole population enclosed in severely fragmented habitat.
The question of the relatedness and its effects on the spatial organization of a mammal populations has already been addressed in a number of species, including carnivores (e.g. Moyer et al. 2006;Maher 2009;Croteau, Heist, Nielsen 2010;Innes et al. 2012;Gour et al. 2013). The correlation between relatedness and spatial distance in Felidae was revealed in the bobcat (Lynx rufus) (Croteau et al. 2010) and the tiger (Panthera tigris) (Gour et al. 2013), although in both cases this relationship was evident only in females at a short (a few kilometers) range. These results, were explainable with the sex-biased dispersal, as females in many mammals are more likely to be philopatric than males (Shields 1987), which should cause higher relatedness at closer distance between dyads of females and was proved to occur in bobcats (Janečka et al. 2007). In our lynx population, evidence for male-biased dispersal and female philopatry could be seen in the higher average relatedness in females than in males, and between male and female dyads. However, this along with the lack of relationship between spatial distribution and relatedness, suggests that although female lynx generally tend to remain in their natal area they do not form spatial family clusters. This would mean that daughters may not regularly inherit portions of their mothers' home ranges as was documented in previous studies on solitary felids (cougars -Puma concolor : Sweanor, Logan & Hornocker 2000;bobcats: Janečka et al. 2006;tigers: Goodrich et al. 2010), and family bonds do not continue after dispersal. Similarly, a lack of spatial clustering, despite female philopatric behavior, was observed in a population of cougars in Yellowstone by Biek et al. (2006).
Whether relatedness has any measurable effect on the distribution of individual felids is particularly intriguing question mainly due to their solitary way of life. In contrast to canids which are often gregarious, the social structure in solitary felids, by definition, should be based on individuals having a low chance of encountering conspecifics. Therefore, even if female philopatry occurs in solitary felids, it may have different consequences for inbreeding avoidance than in canids.
Gregariousness may favor the establishment of a system of individual recognition based on close association with group members (Tang-Martinez 2001; Wahaj et al. 2004). Therefore, despite a higher risk of inbreeding, potentially resulting from extended association with family members, so far little support has been found for mating between close relatives in gregarious predators (Wahaj et al. 2004;Geffen et al. 2011;Sparkman et al. 2012). Although a mechanism of kin recognition based on genetic similarity at MHC genes has been proposed in various animals (Mannig et al. 2000, Wedekind & Penn 2000) some studies suggest that no physiologically based kin recognition systems have evolved in vertebrates, and only social mechanisms, based on familiarity and phenotype matching is likely to provide cues for kin recognition (Tang-Martinez 2001; Wahaj et al. 2004;Lucia & Keane 2012). Solitary felids have fewer opportunities to consort with family members, and consequently for situations which could place them at risk of mating with kin, but at the same time they have a lower possibility of learning their relatives' phenotypes to discriminate them from nonkin individuals. Surprisingly, however, closely related male and female lynx in our study showed a tendency to stay close to each other. This finding along with the fact that no inbreeding was found in this population (Schmidt et al. 2009) would support existence of some kin recognition.
Limited opportunities to learn family phenotype and kin discriminating capabilities in solitary felids would suggest that a random mating system is also likely to occur. Such a system was observed in two species of territorial, pair-breeding birds, saddlebacks (Philesturnus carunculatus) and robins (Petroica australis), which were found to mate randomly, irrespective of relatedness (Jamieson et al. 2009). A similar scenario has also been proposed for wolves and Arctic foxes, which may pair indiscriminately outside their natal group (Geffen et al. 2011). It was concluded that in territorial mammals, especially when the chance of encountering kin is low, acquiring territory may be a priority over the need to avoid inbreeding. Moreover, when there is a very low encounter rate, random mating should generally result in unrelated pairs. Such a mechanism should be even more likely in solitary felids, such as the Eurasian lynx. Our study (although showing these relationships only indirectly, through a lack of correlation between spatial interactions between individuals and their relatedness) seems to corroborate the system proposed by Jamieson et al. (2009).
Small size of our study area and its lynx population along with the lynx large home ranges (Schmidt et al.1997) could have affected the range of spatial relationships between the individuals. However, because of the isolated character of the BPF the lynx population constituted a relatively well distinguished entity, clearly genetically different from neighboring populations (Schmidt et al. 2009;Ratkiewicz et al. 2012). The kinship relationships revealed by our study should thus exemplify the processes typical for populations with limited role of dispersal in shaping the spatial distribution and genetic diversity. It is concordant with our prediction for isolated population of the solitary felid, however it contradicts results of another recent study conducted on an isolated ocelot population at the Barro Colorado Island, Panama, which found that overlapping individuals were more related to one another than the population as a whole (Rodgers et al. 2015). Despite of this, however, average relatedness in both species was low suggesting that there may be additional factors affecting the interplay between the relatedness and spatial organization (such as population density, home range size, population turnover), which is worth of farther studies. In case of our studied population of Eurasian lynx the disclosed domination of the population by few reproducing individuals corresponds closely with a generally very low genetic diversity estimated in this population (Ratkiewicz et al. 2014). However, low average relatedness in the population (this study) along with a lack of inbreeding (Schmidt et al. 2009) could be surprising considering its relatively high isolation and low genetic diversity. We suggest that while limitation of breeding to only a few resident individuals determines the general level of genetic variability in the population, the existence of unrelated floaters provides a "breeding buffer" that may augment the gene pool in case of territory vacation. This mechanism would support previous assumption that social factors such as territoriality and home range fidelity may be responsible for the maintenance of fixed genetic structure recorded in the lynx despite lacking physical barriers (Hellborg et al. 2002;Rueness et al. 2003;Ratkiewicz et al. 2012). On the other hand, this mechanism does not provide full safety from eventual genetic-related problems. If coupling of individuals and potential breeding occurs regardless of relatedness in solitary felids, as suggested indirectly by our study, it may quickly lead to genetic depauperation in small and isolated populations. An example is an introduced Dinaric population of the Eurasian lynx, where low heterozygosity and high inbreeding was found (Sindicic et al. 2013b), most likely as a result of the small number of founders and mating between close relatives (Sindicic et al. 2013a).
In conclusion, our study suggests that model of regulation of the genetic variability in solitary felid populations may not differ from other vertebrates, including social species of carnivores. This system, however, is likely to fail in preserving genetic diversity in small, highly isolated populations, therefore restoring habitat connectivity is crucial to ensure sufficient immigration from neighboring populations.  3 The scatterplots of the lynx pair-wise spatial distances between harmonic mean home range centers or points of hair-sampling in relation to relatedness estimators (Lynch and Ritland 1999). A: pairs of all individuals; B: male-female pairs. Note, in case of male-female relationships, a significant negative correlation was found using the Mantel test (R=-0.27, p<0.00001)

[SECTION] figure captions
The multiple-tubes genotyping protocol
We used the multiple-tubes procedure to test for amplification errors and genotyping hair samples according to following steps: 1) A screening step was designed to identify and remove lowquality DNA samples. All samples were amplified four times at two loci (Fca008 and Fca149) selected for their good amplification rates and reliability; samples showing <= 50% positive PCR (PCR+) were removed. 2) All samples which passed the screening were further processed to obtain four additional PCR replicates per locus. Multilocus genotypes were analysed with software RELIOTYPE (Miller, Joyce and Waits 2002), which computes the maximum-likelihood of each genotype in the sampled population (reliability score R), and estimates the number of additional replicates needed for each locus to obtain a reliable genotype (see step 3). Maximum-likelihood estimates are obtained assuming that allele frequencies of the sampled population are known. Reference allele frequencies were estimated from the genotypes of 11 individual blood samples collected from captured lynx. We used RELIOTYPE with the default settings. A sample was accepted as reliable if R > 0.95. Each allele was accepted as "true" if it has been seen at least twice in PCR replicates at putative heterozygous loci, or at least three times at putative homozygous loci. 3) Samples with low amplification success and R < 0.95 were further replicated four times. A final reliability analysis led to definitive genotype acceptance (if R > 0.95) or rejection. Reliable genotypes were used to identify the consensus genotypes, using GIMLET 1.3.3 (Valière, 2002) with the threshold method: an allele was retained in the consensus genotype if it was scored at least two times. The consensus genotypes were used as "true" reference genotypes to compute the frequency of PCR errors. The blood samples were replicated twice using the same multiple-tubes protocol.
PCR errors are expressed per-genotype as the observed number of erroneous genotypes divided by the number of genotypes in which an error could have been observed (Broquet and Petit, 2004). Allelic dropout (ADO) was counted as the proportion of alleles which did not amplify per each heterozygous locus. False alleles (FA) were identified as follows: 1) alleles originating from nonspecific amplifications were identified by their molecular weight which was outside the range detected in the reference genotypes; all those FA were easily identified and not recorded; 2) alleles originating from cross-sample laboratory contaminations during PCR processing: alleles showing the molecular weight of true alleles were defined as FA if they were detected only once at least in seven replicated PCRs; accepting these alleles could have led to define false heterozygotes (Taberlet et al. 1996; 3) alleles originating from mixed samples, that is from DNA extracted from samples containing hair from more than one individual (Roon et al. 2005). In these cases, three or four distinct alleles could be detected at some polymorphic loci. Only the last two kinds of FA were recorded.

