[SECTION] title
Rapid species identification of eight sympatric northern Australian macropods from faecal-pellet DNA

[SECTION] abstract
Context. Conservation of vulnerable and endangered species requires a comprehensive understanding of their distribution and habitat requirements, so as to implement effective management strategies. Visual scat surveys are a common noninvasive method for monitoring populations. However, morphological similarity of scats among sympatric species presents a problem for accurate identification. Visual misidentifications of scats can have major impacts on the accuracy of abundance and distribution surveys of target species, wasting resources and misdirecting management and conservation actions. DNA identification of scats can overcome this issue, while simultaneously providing a rich source of genetic information for population and dietary studies.Aims. We developed a simple and reliable method to identify morphologically similar macropod scats from eight sympatric species in north-eastern Australia, using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) of a portion of the mtDNA ND2 gene.Methods. We identified a short (275-bp) polymorphic region of ND2, which is easily amplifiable from degraded DNA, developed a primer set, and identified a set of three restriction endonucleases (AluI, BstNI and HphI) which, in combination, can discriminate among the eight target species. So as to test the effectiveness of this protocol, we collected 914 macropod scats from 53 sites in the north-eastern Australia.Key results. In total, 406 of these scats were extracted, with 398 (98%) containing amplifiable macropod DNA. All 398 scats were subsequently identified to species by using our RFLP protocol. Sequencing of a subset of these samples confirmed the accuracy of the test. Species identification of scats by using DNA identified eight species of macropods, five of which were outside their documented distributions, one of which was ~400 km.Conclusions. Our PCR-RFLP method is a simple and efficient means to identify macropod scats to species, eliminating the need for sequencing, which is costly, time-consuming and requires additional laboratory equipment.Implications. The method allows for rapid and non-invasive assessment of macropod species and is particularly useful for surveying populations across multiple sites.

[SECTION] introduction
Non-invasively collected genetic samples have been used increasingly over the past decade to provide information on genetic structure, demography, life history, population subdivision, reproduction, sex ratio, diet and disease of rare and elusive animals (Foran et al. 1997;Kohn and Wayne 1997;Taberlet et al. 1999;Waits and Paetkau 2005). The primary advantage of non-invasive sampling is that they allow genetic studies of free-ranging animals without having to catch, handle or even observe them. DNA has been successfully extracted from several non-invasive sources including hair (Constable et al. 2001), shed skin (Fetzner 1999), shed feathers (Rudnick et al. 2005), faeces (Lucchini et al. 2002), urine (Hausknecht et al. 2007), egg shell (Martín-Gálvez et al. 2011), blood spots left on snow (Scandura 2005) and mammal bones from regurgitated owl pellets (Taberlet and Fumagalli 1996). Non-invasive genetic sampling has been particularly important for conserving small populations of endangered species (Banks et al. 2003), but is now also being used for monitoring changes in occupancy and geographical range for more widely dispersed species (McKelvey et al. 2006;Ebert et al. 2009;Arandjelovic et al. 2011).
In Australia, macropod marsupials are closely monitored to establish the breeding success, dispersal and survival of individuals within small populations of highly endangered species (Zenger et al. 2003;Sigg et al. 2005;Piggott et al. 2006); and to estimate species' distributions and population sizes at continental and regional scales for species less at risk of extinction (Southwell 1994;Southwell et al. 1995b). The tropical savannas of northern Australia cover almost a quarter of the continent and support the highest diversity of large macropodids (Ritchie 2010), including 9 of the 13 extant species of Macropus. Recent studies have suggested an alarming decline in biodiversity across the region (Woinarski and Ash 2002) but detailed information on faunal declines are limited to specific areas (such as Kakadu National Park), because of the large geographic scale of the region and the difficulties of surveying animals at low population densities. Surveying the distribution of macropods is critical to the design and monitoring of management and conservation programs (Clarke et al. 2001) in the face of increasing anthropogenic land-use, such as mining and pastoralism (Williams et al. 2005), and climate change (Ritchie and Bolitho 2008).
Several direct and indirect techniques are currently in use to monitor macropod populations and species distributions (Southwell 1989), but can be costly, time consuming, subject to biases depending on the observer, time of day, weather, species crypsis and day versus night activity and require highly trained field workers. Direct visual methods are more commonly used and include aerial surveys that are able to cover large areas but are limited to open habitats (Caughley and Grigg 1981;Lundie-Jenkins et al. 1999;Southwell and Sheppard 2000;Cairns et al. 2008) and ground surveys, such as walked-line transects that overcome the terrain and habitat issues of aerial surveys, but are time consuming (Coulson and Raines 1985;Southwell and Jarman 1987;Southwell 1994;Southwell et al. 1995aSouthwell et al. , 1995bSouthwell et al. , 1997Southwell et al. , 1999;;le Mar et al. 2001). Ground surveys have also been modified from walking to driving line transects to increase the distance cover and number of transects able to be monitored (Coulson and Raines 1985;Ritchie et al. 2008).
Indirect, non-invasive methods for the detection of macropods have included monitoring hair tubes, arches and snares to determine species presence points (Alacs et al. 2003), but have predominately focussed on scats (Coulson and Raines 1985;Johnson and Jarman 1987;Telfer et al. 2006Telfer et al. , 2008;;Styger et al. 2011;Wiggins and Bowman 2011). Scats are often the most common and easily collected samples, and are one of the best non-invasive methods for monitoring populations. However, incorrect visual species identification of scats can be problematic (Foran et al. 1997). Therefore, there is a need for techniques that minimise incorrect species identification of scats before in-depth and expensive analyses (Ruiz-González et al. 2008). For many studies, this is easily performed on the basis of the location, size, shape, colour or texture of the sample. However, classification by morphology is subjective and can be complicated by several factors (Foran et al. 1997).
For macropods, these factors include multiple species being comparable in size and sharing similar diets, resulting in scats that can resemble each other in morphology and composition (Trigg 2005). This makes identification of macropod species from scats problematic (Bulinski and McArthur 2000;Alacs et al. 2003;Trigg 2005). The issue is further complicated by many macropod species being sympatric (Kaufmann 1974;Croft 1987;Alacs et al. 2003;Ritchie et al. 2008;Telfer et al. 2008). Therefore, the development of methods that accurately identify macropod species from scats is crucial to confirm species ranges and habitat utilisation (Foran et al. 1997), and for scat collection-based monitoring programs (Cossios and Angers 2006).
Given the problem of unambiguously identifying a species from a scat, a consistent, rapid and inexpensive method of identification that is applicable to a wide variety of macropod species is needed (Foran et al. 1997). DNA methods for scat samples focus on the intestinal cells of the animals that are incorporated into faeces (Cossios and Angers 2006). Several genetic species-identification techniques have been developed for studies on the basis of non-invasive sampling (Piggott and Taylor 2003;Bidlack et al. 2007). These methods have included the amplification and direct sequencing of mitochondrial DNA (Alacs et al. 2003), the use of speciesspecific mtDNA primers (Tobe and Linacre 2008), speciesspecific lengths of nuclear fragments (Oliveira et al. 2010), species-specific allele lengths of a given microsatellite (Poetsch et al. 2001), or polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) methods (Paxinos et al. 1997).
The aim of the present study was to develop and test a reliable, cost-effective and unambiguous DNA-based method to identify and distinguish among eight macropod species utilising fieldcollected scats (Table 1). To determine the field suitability of the technique, we surveyed a large collection of scats from northeastern Australia, and compared the data to the known distribution of each species.

[SECTION] design of the pcr-rflp species-identification test
We generated 20 complete mitochondrial ND2 sequences from tissue samples from eight medium-large macropod species found in north-eastern Australia (Table 1). Two tissue samples with the greatest geographical separation within Queensland were chosen for each species. Two extra M. antilopinus from the Northern Territory and three extra M. robustus, one each from New South Wales, South Australia and the Northern Territory, were also included to assess DNA sequence variation. Although M. fuliginosus was unlikely to be found at our collection sites (IUCN 2012), we took a precautionary approach and included one sample in the analysis to ensure that the species was identifiable from the closely related M. giganteus. DNA was extracted from tissue samples as described by Nicholls et al. (2000). PCRs were conducted in 25-mL volumes containing 2 mL of DNA, 1Â HotMaster PCR buffer (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany), 0.2 mM of each dNTP, 0.4 mM of each primer (M1034: 5 0 CCCTTCCCATACTAATGTC3 0 , and M1035: 5 0 GATTTGCGTTCGGATGA3 0 ) and 0.1 U HotMaster Taq-DNA polymerase (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). Thermocycling was conducted using 2-min enzyme activation at 94 C, followed by 35 cycles of 94 C for 20 s, 55 C for 10 s and 65 C for 60 s, with a final extension step of 65 C for 10 min. PCR products were purified using AMPure (Beckman Coulter, Indianapolis, IN, USA) as per manufacturer's instructions and Sanger sequenced with BigDye v3.1 chemistry (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA) in 1/16 reactions, using the original PCR primers and additional internal sequencing primers M461 (5 0 AACAATGCTCGGAGGCTGAG3 0 ) andM440 (5 0 AGGCTAGGATTTTTCGTAGGTG3 0 ). Sequencing reactions were purified using CleanSEQ (Beckman Coulter, Indianapolis, IN, USA) as per manufacturer's instructions and run on an ABI 3130XL Genetic Analyzer (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Chromatograms were edited, individual sequence contigs assembled using Sequencher 4.7 (Gene Codes Corporation, Ann Arbor, MI, USA) and sequences aligned using Geneious Pro 5.6.4 (Biomatters, Auckland, New Zealand).
Faecal DNA is often of low quality, so the fragment selected for the species identification needed to be short, while still containing species-specific restriction sites. We identified a short, 275-bp fragment of the ND2 gene containing multiple restriction enzyme sites, and designed a set of macropodspecific PCR primers (M496 5 0 -GCTTGAATAACAAACCAA TGAACCC-3 0 /M497 5 0 -CCTCCTCAGCCTCCGAGYAT-3 0 ) by using the primer-design tool in Geneious (Biomatters, Auckland, New Zealand). The amplified region contained no size variation among the 20 aligned sequences. So as to select informative restriction endonucleases, an in silico analysis was conducted using the 20 ND2 sequences. A panel of three endonucleases was identified that produce a diagnostic RFLP pattern to unambiguously identify all eight species (Fig. 1a).
To test the in silico PCR-RFLP design, we re-amplified one sample for each species by using the short-amplicon primers (M496/M497). PCRs were conducted in 25-mL volumes containing 2 mL of DNA, 1Â HotMaster PCR buffer (Eppendorf), 0.2 mM each dNTP, 0.2 mM of each primer and 0.1 U HotMaster Taq-DNA polymerase (Eppendorf). Thermocycling was conducted using 2-min enzyme activation  at 94 C, followed by 35 cycles of 94 C for 20 s, 55 C for 10 s and 65 C for 30 s, with a final extension step of 65 C for 10 min. Amplicons were subjected to restriction-enzyme digestion using a two-step digestion with three endonucleases because of one requiring a temperature of 60 C. The digestions were conducted in 20-mL volumes. The first step contained 10 mL of PCR product, 2 mL of Buffer 4 (NEB, Ipswich, MA, USA), 6.5 mL of distilled water and three units each of AluI and HphI (NEB). The first incubation was performed for 90 min at 37 C. Samples were then removed and six units of BstNI (NEB) were added. Samples then underwent a second incubation at 60 C for 60 min. Digested products were visualised with ethidium bromide staining following electrophoresis in TBEbuffered 3.5% agarose gels.

[SECTION] field methods and pcr-rflp scat identification
To test the effectiveness of the PCR-RFLP protocol for identifying scats obtained in the field, we collected 914 macropod scats from 53 transects in three bioregions (Cape York, Einasleigh Uplands and Gulf Plains) from north-eastern Australia (Fig. 2). Each collection site was split into two 5-kmlong transects, at least 5 km apart. Four spatially separated scats were collected at every 1-km point along these transects. All scats collected were geo-referenced using a hand-held GPS (WGS 84). Scat samples were placed in individual paper bags in the field and stored in plastic boxes with a silica desiccant, before being transported to the University of Adelaide and then frozen at À20 C. A total of 406 scats were selected for DNA extraction and species identification from across all sites. Scats were selected to ensure that at least one scat was taken from every available 1km transect point. Fresh scats were preferentially chosen for extraction, although 59 old scats were also included. A small amount (2 cm 2 ) of the outer surface of each scat was scraped and removed with a sterile scalpel to be used in the DNA extraction. The outside of the scat was targeted because of the mucosal layer containing epithelial cells (Walker et al. 2009) and to minimise the amount of plant material added to the extraction. 'Bioline ISOLATE fecal DNA' kits (Bioline, London, UK) were used for extracting DNA according to the manufacturer's instructions, but with the following modifications: the volume of lysis buffer was increased to 800 mL, vortexing time and elution time were increased to 5 min and elution was conducted in two steps of 50 mL. Extracted DNA was stored at 4 C. Extractions were performed in a DNA-extraction laboratory physically separate from PCR-setup and post-PCR laboratories, to prevent cross contamination with previously amplified DNA and all extractions included a negative control. All DNA extracts and negative controls were amplified for the 275-bp mtDNA ND2 fragment, digested with restriction endonucleases and examined by gel electrophoresis, as described above. Species identification was performed by comparing the observed RFLP gel pattern with the expected gel pattern for each of the eight species (Fig. 1a,b).
The location of each identified scat was plotted against the current geographic distribution for each species by using ArcGIS 10.1 (ESRI, Redlands, CA, USA). Species geographicdistribution data were accessed from the IUCN Red List (IUCN 2012).To test the accuracy of species identification, a subset of 24 scat samples (eight M. agilis, five M. antilopinus, four M. giganteus, five M. parryi, two M. rufus) were then sequenced by using standard Sanger sequencing as described above. Sequences were aligned to and compared with the 20 ND2 sequences of known species. Thirteen of the samples chosen for sequencing, to confirm accuracy, were those samples found to be outside their current distributions.

[SECTION] results
We identified a 275-bp region of the mtDNA ND2 gene that contained nucleotide differences between all eight species of Macropus, allowing the design of a simple PCR-RFLP species-identification test. In silico restriction-enzyme analysis confirmed that species-specific RFLP patterns could be generated (Fig. 1a). Empirical testing was conducted on a single sample for each species, using a combination of three endonucleases in a two-step digestion protocol, confirming that the expected species specific RFLP patterns could be obtained (Fig. 1b).
Of the 406 scats extracted, only eight (1.9%) failed to amplify for the macropod-specific 275-bp ND2 target. On the basis of morphology, three of these scats were identified as likely to have come from sheep and five were of extremely poor quality, possible as a result of an extended time frame between deposition and collection.
Six species were identified among the remaining 398 scats, with three species (M. agilis, M. antilopinus and M. robustus) making up 90% of samples (Table 2). Two species (M. dorsalis and M. fuliginosus) were not detected. Direct DNA sequencing of 24 scats confirmed the RFLP-species identification (i.e. correct identification) in all cases, with one exception (i.e. 96% of cases). One scat identified as M. parryi via PCR-RFLP had a DNA sequence identical to M. rufus. This misidentification was due to sequence variation in one restriction site that produced the same RFLP pattern as did M. parryi. Because of this one sample being incorrectly identified as M. parryi, all other samples identified as M. parryi were also checked via sequencing and found to be correct. To avoid this possible issue for future M. rufus samples, a species-specific endonuclease is available. On the basis of the M. rufus samples from this study, SfcI and Tsp45I are M. rufusspecific endonucleases, cutting the 275-bp fragment at Positions 183 and 121, respectively. The addition of either of these endonucleases produces a band pattern that would be distinguishable from the other species patterns.
Almost all of the identified scats fell within the known range of each of the six detected species (Fig. 3). However, five of the six species were found to have scats identified outside of their known distribution. The most extreme case was one M. sample found in Lawn Hill, some ~400 km from the edge of its range.

[SECTION] discussion
Non-invasive sampling for wildlife research and monitoring has several well documented benefits. However, errors in visual identification of non-invasive samples, including scats (Jane cka et al. 2008;Harrington et al. 2010), can lead to false positive and false negative species identifications. Such errors can have major impacts on the accuracy of abundance and distribution surveys of target species, wasting resources and misdirecting management and conservation actions, and can complicate subsequent genetic analyses. We designed, tested and implemented a mtDNA PCR-RFLP species-identification test that could be used with DNA from scats to identify eight species of sympatric macropods from north-eastern Australia. This method is fast and cost-effective where access to a typical   (Paxinos et al. 1997;Pilgrim et al. 1998;Jiang et al. 2011), felids (Mills et al. 2000;Nagata et al. 2005;Cossios and Angers 2006), mustelids (Hansen and Jacobsen 1999;Gómez-Moliner et al. 2004;Rosellini et al. 2008;Ruiz-González et al. 2008) or a combination (Bidlack et al. 2007;Livia et al. 2007). These studies have demonstrated the feasibility of using such an approach on non-invasively collected samples.
The protocol that we established for macropods has many advantages, including the following: (1) it relies on the high copynumber mtDNA for improved species resolution in low-quality, low-quantity samples; (2) it uses multiple restriction sites, reducing the risk of misidentification; and (3) a short DNA fragment (275-bp) means that it is more likely to provide an intact template for amplification (Kohn and Wayne 1997;Ruiz-González et al. 2008) when working with poor-quality samples containing degraded DNA. RFLP-based approaches have been shown to work well for more distantly related taxa (Bidlack et al. 2007), as well as for differentiating species within specific geographic areas (Zapata et al. 2007).
Unambiguous identification of macropod presence by using DNA from scats provides a useful tool for estimating and monitoring macropod distribution and diversity, potentially providing a strengthened understanding of the potential impacts of environmental change and conservation needs. For example, there is a clear need to improve our understanding of the biotic and abiotic factors that affect the distribution and abundance of macropods in northern and eastern Australia (Murphy and Bowman 2007;Ritchie and Bolitho 2008;Ritchie et al. 2008). A first step to addressing this research priority is the correct identification of species and the habitats that they prefer. As Australia's largest terrestrial herbivores, macropods may be useful surrogates for monitoring biodiversity and as indicators of environmental change (Lindenmayer and Likens 2011). A rapid, cost-effective and accurate method of monitoring the distribution of large macropods in tropical northern Australia is particularly important, given their relatively lower densities than those of temperate macropodids (Ritchie et al. 2008). Our finding of five species outside their current known range (one substantially so) highlighted the value of accurate identification of field-collected scats and deserves immediate further investigation. Our survey identified six of the macropod species, yet failed to detect both M. dorsalis and M. fuliginosus. Macropus fuliginosus is predominately found in southern Australia (IUCN 2012), so it is not surprising that it was not detected. The distribution of M. dorsalis does extend into the north-east of Australia; however, its preferred habitat is thick scrub (Menkhorst and Knight 2010), whereas our transects mostly ran through more open areas.
Long-term monitoring of species distribution and abundance can provide a critical component of future conservation planning and management. Four of the eight Macropus species have relatively restricted distributions in northern and eastern Australia and may be at a greater risk from intensification of grazing, changes to fire regimes and climate change (Ritchie and Bolitho 2008). Macropus antilopinus appear to be at a particular risk from climate change driving large-scale contractions and possible extinction in northern Australia (Ritchie and Bolitho 2008). Faecal studies constitute a non-invasive method of macropod species identification that can reduce the anthropogenic pressures and stress from direct observation, while, importantly, avoiding field-based misidentification. It is possible that the molecular identification of scats could replace existing field methods for quantifying macropod distribution and abundance. However, a cost-benefit analysis is needed before such a conclusion can be definitely made. In addition, identified samples can be further genetically analysed for population genetic and dietary information, opening up the possibility of studying other ecological and evolutionary aspects of these species (Cossios and Angers 2006).
Five of the eight species (M. rufus, M. giganteus, M. fuliginosus, M. robustus and M. parryi) are also subject to commercial harvesting. Although illegal hunting and trade in kangaroo products are not currently a major conservation concern, the PCR-RFLP species-identification test is well suited to the identification of kangaroo products, for example, in monitoring species killed as part of the legal harvest and to identify contaminated or substituted meat products (Moore et al. 2003;Haider et al. 2012).

[SECTION] conclusions
PCR-RFLP of mtDNA ND2 from field-collected scats can be used as a diagnostic tool for the discrimination of macropod species in north-eastern Australia in the absence of visual confirmation and expensive DNA sequencing, for forensic, management and conservation purposes. Our results indicated that the method is a reliable, efficient and probably a time-saving and cost-effective procedure for improving knowledge of the spatial distributions of sympatric macropod species. Molecular identification of scats could replace or supplement existing methods for distribution and abundance surveys where accurate species identification is required. Specifically, our speciesidentification technique has several practical applications that could strengthen macropod conservation and management, including the following: (1) determining species presence and relative abundance; (2) mapping habitat preferences and species distributions; (3) identifying kangaroo meat products; (4) predicting species responses to habitat modification and fragmentation through increased anthropogenic land-use, fire regimes and climate change. More broadly, our method can be used in studies focussed on population genetics, phylogeographic variation and landscape genetics. This is because species identification is a necessary step for additional analysis, including the genotyping of polymorphic loci, for individual identification and for estimating dispersal, population size, relatedness and population-genetic parametersinformation that is key for the conservation, monitoring and management of species (Waits and Paetkau 2005). samples, North Queensland landholders for permitting access to their properties and The Australian Biological Tissue Collection, South Australian Museum and Australian National Wildlife Collection, CSIRO, for kindly providing samples. We also thank two anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments and suggestions.

