[SECTION] (no title)
Quantification of fecal pellet groups is the most widely used index to estimate the population size and density of ungulates (Mayle et al. 1999). However, in habitats where several ungulate species coexist, accurate identification of the species producing the fecal pellets is most important, as misidentification of species often results in overestimation of the density of a target species (Theuerkauf et al. 2008). Many studies have successfully identified species by the deposition features of ungulates, such as the sizes (Russo and Olhausen 1987;Chame 2003;Chapman 2004) and defecation rate (Chapman 2004;Abaturov et al. 2008). However, distinguishing the feces of some ungulate species can be difficult because the size and the amount of feces produced by each individual varies with age, body size, and seasons (Mitchell and McCowan 1984;Rogers 1987;Chame 2003). Therefore, for visually indistinguishable species, the pH of feces and noninvasive fecal DNA have been used for discrimination (Elliott and Longhurst 1984;Kurose et al. 2005;Sugimoto et al. 2006;Kim et al. 2008;Yamashiro et al. 2010).
Two large ungulate species, the Japanese serow (Capricornis crispus) and sika deer (Cervus nippon), inhabit in Japan. In the past, these species have been generally allopatric, but in recent years, their distributions have begun to overlap due to an increase in the sika deer population (Tokida 2008). The population sizes and densities of these two species have been assessed using fecal pellet counts or fecal pellet group counts. Thus, the identification of fecal pellet groups between these two species is extremely important. Takatsuki et al. (1981) revealed that the Japanese serow deposits a larger number of feces than the sika deer from the observation of captive animals. Based on their findings, most field monitoring of the Japanese serow uses the criteria "a fecal pellet group of more than 200 pellets as being from the Japanese serow" (The Agency for Cultural Affairs-Japan 1994).
The Japanese serow was promoted to "special national monument" status in 1955, and population trends and habitat conditions have been monitored since 1985. As usual, in each protected area, two survey programs are conducted (a primary survey program every 6 or 7 years by specialists, and a supplemental survey program annually by local volunteers). The misidentification of Japanese serow and sika deer feces in supplemental survey programs has been pointed out (Tokushima and Kochi Prefectures Board of Education 1996) because of limits to each volunteer's ability to collect precise data. Therefore, we developed an identification method for the two species based on fecal DNA sampling (Yamashiro et al. 2010). We demonstrated that 41.4% of the sika deer's fecal pellet groups were misidentified as those of the Japanese serow by local volunteers (supplemental survey in Tokushima Prefecture in 2008; Yamashiro et al. 2010). Genetic analysis using noninvasive sampling is effective for monitoring the Japanese serow. However, application of the DNA-based species identification method to all fecal samples is unrealistic because genetic analyses are time-consuming and costly. Therefore, we need to develop a more convenient method that is applicable to field surveys. To the best of our knowledge, morphological differences between fecal pellet groups of Japanese serow and sika deer have not yet been studied quantitatively under natural conditions. The features of fecal pellet groups in the wild may be different from those of captive animals. Therefore, we should construct more morphologically precise identification criteria of the Japanese serow's fecal pellets under natural conditions.
In the present study, we identified fecal pellet groups of two species, the Japanese serow and sika deer, using DNA markers and investigated whether the two species can be differentiated based on fecal morphology.

[SECTION] study site and fecal sampling
The study was conducted on Mt. Yatsurasan and Mt. Maruzasa in Tokushima Prefecture, Shikoku, Japan. In October 2011, we placed three quadrats (100 × 100 m) at altitudes of about 700 m on Mt. Yatsurasan (sites 1-3), and one quadrat at an altitude of approximately 1,400 m on Mt. Maruzasa (site 4). Within the quadrats, we selected all fresh fecal samples without distinguishing between Japanese serow and sika deer and measured the maximum diameter of each fecal pellet group (PG-MD). After photographing the fecal pellet groups, 10 pellets from each pellet group were preserved in a 15-ml tube with 99% ethanol, and all remaining fecal pellets were collected in a nylon bag.

[SECTION] genetic analysis
Fecal DNA was extracted following the method of Zhang et al. (2006). We identified the Japanese serow and sika deer using PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLPs) of the mitochondrial cytochrome b (Cyt b) gene developed previously by Yamashiro et al. (2010).

[SECTION] morphological analysis of feces
We counted the pellet number (PN) in each pellet  Seven fecal pellet measurements were made according to criteria set out by Àlvarez (1994); total length (TOL), maximum body diameter of the pellet body measured at the midpoint of TOL (MAB), maximum length from the point of body inflexion with the tip to the middle of the base (BL), maximum diameter measured 2 mm from the most extruding point of the base along the longitudinal axis of the pellet (MAD), MAB/TOL, and MAD/TOL (Fig. 1).
To examine the degree of aggregation of the fecal pellets, we calculated the proportion of adherence of fecal pellets per total number of pellets (PG-AD) using photographs of the feces (Fig. 2). After counting the maximum pellet number adhering to each other within one pellet group, we calculated the ratio of adhering pellets for the entire sample of pellets (maximum number of adhering pellets/total pellet number).

[SECTION] statistical analysis
For the seven fecal pellet measurements (TOL, MAB, BL, MAD, MAB/TOL, MAD/TOL, and BL/TOL) and three fecal pellet group characters (PG-MD, PG-AD, and PN), the difference between the Japanese serow and sika deer was examined by Student's t test (StatView, version 5.0; SAS Institute, Cary, NC). A stepwise discriminant analysis on seven fecal pellet measurements and three fecal pellet group characters were used to determine the best combination of variables that would separate the two species. The program were performed using Excel-Tokei 2010 (Social Survey Research Information Co., Ltd.).

[SECTION] species identification of the fecal pellet groups based on pcr-rflps
In total, 88 fecal pellet groups were collected at four sites. We were able to amplify the Cyt b gene in 82 of 88 (93.1%) fecal samples. According to identification method based on PCR-RFLPs, 28 fecal pellet groups were from Japanese serow and 54 were from sika deer.

[SECTION] fecal morphology
Six fecal pellet shapes (A, D, E, G, H, and I) were found in Japanese serow and all 10 fecal pellet shapes (A-J) were found in sika deer (Table 1). More than two fecal pellet shapes were seen within one fecal pellet group of Japanese serow and sika deer.  The means ± SD of the seven fecal pellet measurements and three fecal pellet group characters of the two species are presented in Table 2. Four (MAB, MAD, MAB/TOL, and MAD/TOL) of seven fecal pellet measurements were significantly different between the two species (Table 2; P < 0.005), however, the ranges of these measurements overlapped. Ranges of PG-MD of the Japanese serow's fecal pellet groups and those of the sika deer were from 7.1 to 39.0 cm and from 15.4 to 303 cm, respectively. The mean of PG-MD was significantly different between Japanese serow and sika deer (24.0 ± 7.8 and 70.7 ± 71.0, respectively; Table 2; P < 0.001). The mean ± SD of PG-AD was 80.2 ± 27.2% in Japanese serow (ranging from 21.1% to 100%) and 18.7 ± 15.9% in sika deer (ranging from 2.0% to 79.6%), and these values were significantly different (Table 2; P < 0.001).
A significant difference was found in the mean ± SD of PN between Japanese serow and sika deer (261.7 ± 161.3 and 70.3 ± 36.0, respectively) (Table 2; P < 0.001), although values of PN varied widely between the two species (19-569 pellets and 11-175 pellets for Japanese serow and sika deer, respectively; Table 2). Figure 3 shows the distribution of pellet number within fecal pellet groups of the Japanese serow and sika deer found at four sites. In Japanese serow, 10 of 28 fecal pellet groups (35.7%) contained less than 200 pellets (Fig. 3).
A stepwise discriminant analysis selected only one fecal pellet group character (PG-AD). Percentages of correct classification with PG-AD were 82.1% (23 of 28 fecal pellet groups) for Japanese serow and 88.9% (48 of 54 fecal pellet groups) for sika deer (Table 3).

