[SECTION] study area
Our study was conducted in the Willamette (~ 6,900 km 2 ) and Deschutes (~ 7,300 km 2 ) National Forests in the northern Cascade Range of Oregon (Figure 1). Forests were dominated at lower elevations by Douglas-fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii) on the west slope of the Cascades, and ponderosa pine (Pinus ponderosa) on the east slope. Higher elevations were characterized by Pacific silver fir (Abies amabilis), subalpine fir (A. lasiocarpa), mountain hemlock (Tsuga mertensiana), lodgepole pine (P. contorta), and alpine meadows. Santiam Pass (1,468 m in elevation), between the Mt. Jefferson and Mt. Washington Wilderness Areas, generally experiences snowfall during 10 months of each year, with a monthly peak of 262 cm of snow depth during March (Western Regional Climate Center 2013); snowfall and snow depth typically increase with increasing elevation in the study area. Average minimum (-6.9 °C) and maximum (22.8 °C) daily temperatures occur during January and July, respectively (Western Regional Climate Center 2013).

[SECTION] data collection and analysis
We collected data on red foxes during October 2012-May 2013 and October 2013-June 2014 using noninvasive survey methods, including camera stations and hair-snagging devices (Figura and Knox 2010), as part of a forest carnivore research project (McFadden-Hiller andHiller 2014, McFadden-Hiller andHiller 2015). We used motion-sensing cameras (e.g., Bushnell Trophy Cam HD, Overland Park, KS; Trail Watcher model 2035 and 2040, Monticello, GA) at ground-level stations baited with 5-20-kg of salvaged wildlife carcasses (e.g., deer [Odocoileus hemionus], beaver [Castor canadensis]). We also used a skunk-essence based lure (Gusto, Minnesota Trapline Products, Pennock, MN) as an attractant applied 2-3 m aboveground on trees near camera stations. Bait and equipment were transported by non-mechanical means (e.g., horse, human) within wilderness areas. We attempted to monitor camera stations every 2-6 weeks, depending on weather conditions, avalanche risk, and other factors. In addition to hair samples collected at camera stations, we conducted searches to collect scat samples near camera stations and in other areas with evidence of fox presence. Hair samples were collected using paper envelopes and scat samples were collected in vials that contained 95% ethyl alcohol.
Although nuclear DNA will ultimately be necessary to assign foxes with high confidence as indigenous, admixed, or non-native (e.g., Statham et al. 2012b), in the present study, we used mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) sequences, which indicated only the matriline or maternal haplotype. Nevertheless, a relatively large sample of historical and modern mtDNA haplotypes from the broader region (e.g., Washington Cascades, California Cascades and Sierra Nevada, Rocky Mountains) Northwest Science Notes: Sierra Nevada Red Fox in Oregon and from several western non-native red fox populations enabled us to determine whether the red foxes in our survey area had indigenous or non-native mtDNA haplotypes (Perrine et al. 2007;Aubry et al. 2009;Sacks et al. 2010Sacks et al. , 2011;;Statham et al. 2011Statham et al. , 2012a, b), b). We used primers and laboratory procedures described in detail in these previous papers to produce 354 bp of the cytochrome-b gene and 342 bp of the D-loop region, totaling 696 bp of mtDNA sequence that we compared to the results of previous studies.

