[SECTION] study sites
Otter faeces (spraints) and data on fish stocks were collected along two salmonid streams in the province of Lower Austria: a) Kleiner Kamp and b) Große Ysper (Fig. 1). The studied area covered 18.3 km of Kleiner Kamp and 21.5 km of Große Ysper (Fig. 1,   1). As studies on otter distribution indicate both sites are representing riverine habitats, which have been repopulated by otters for more than 20 years (Kranz, 1995;Kranz et al., 2001;Kranz and Poledník, 2009). Furthermore, both study sites are situated within the siliceous Bohemian mountains and have similar stream widths and flow regimes (Table 1) (Fink et al., 2000;Haunschmid and Weiss, 2005). Existence of surrounding water bodies, notably fishponds, is comparable between the study sites, both in number and density. According to the longitudinal zonation of running waters (Illies, 1961) and the ichthyological classification, the river stretches investigated belong to the epi-and metarhithral. Thus, the native fish fauna is dominated by brown trout (Salmo trutta) and bullhead (Cottus gobio).
Besides considering hydromorphological comparability as described above, these two study sites were chosen because of differences in fisheries management practices. Kleiner Kamp undergoes a sustainable, ecologically oriented management including the abandonment of stocking fish and harvest regulations considering natural productivity (annual average fish harvest about 0.3 kg/km (G. Unfer, personal observation, 2014). In the fishing beats of Große Ysper hatchery fish are stocked periodically during the fishing season from April to September. Usually brown trout, rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) and brook trout (Salvelinus fontinalis) in catchable sizes (>250 mm total length) are released. All three species are stocked in equal proportions and the total annual amount of stocked fish ranges from 25 to 45 kg/km, the average fish harvest, i.e. fish caught by angling, is about 3 kg/km (A. Pöcksteiner, personal communication, 2011).
Brown trout as the dominant species in our study sites particularly requires structures along the riverbanks, which provide shelter and hardly frequent open water zones in streams (Armstrong et al., 2003;Klemetsen et al., 2003). Accordingly, to supply their needs otters have to adapt the shape of home ranges to given habitat conditions (Ó Néill et al., 2009). Therefore, we chose to present otter densities and fish biomass in oligotrophic salmonid streams per stream kilometre.

[SECTION] sample collection and dna extraction
Otter spraints were collected along the watercourse on sand banks, rocks, tributary outfalls or banks under bridges. Sampling points were defined considering an equal spatial distribution along the investigated river sections, and finally recorded using a global positioning system unit. We visited these points during three sampling periods for each study site between February and mid April 2011. One sampling period consisted of five consecutive days and all sampling points of one study site were checked daily for fresh spraints from the previous night. To minimise DNA degradation and to maximise DNA amplification success, sampling was carried out mainly during morning hours in cold months (Coxon et al. 1999;Nsubuga et al. 2004;Hájková et al., 2006;Lampa et al., 2008). To avoid cross-contamination only spraints that had no physical contact with other spraints were collected. Samples were stored in plastic tubes with 30 ml of a nucleic acid stabilising reagent (3.53 M ammonium sulphate, 13.3 mM EDTA, 16.6 mM sodium citrate, adjusted to pH 5.2 with 1 M sulphuric acid) and frozen at -20 • C.
DNA extraction was carried out subsequently after every study period. Faecal DNA was extracted using the QIAmp DNA Stool Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) following the manufacturer's protocol with slight modifications: increase of final incubation time to 5 min before elution of the DNA extract.

[SECTION] dna quantification, identification of otter individuals and pedigree analysis
To ensure cost-and time-effectiveness as well as data quality we rejected genotyping error-prone samples by exclusion of samples containing target DNA in very low concentrations. Therefore we quantified target DNA in the extracts applying quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) using a SYBR Greenbased assay in a LightCycler 1.0 Instrument (Roche Applied Science, Mannheim, Germany) and the primer system LutRT2, following the protocol of Hausknecht et al. (2010). An absolute quantification was performed with an external calibration curve obtained from three-fold quantification of 17 standards with known DNA concentrations of the target species. Subsequently we determined the DNA concentration of extracts using the equation in Morin et al. (2001) and excluded samples containing <5 pg/L DNA in the extract from further analyses.
Samples were genotyped at 11 microsatellite loci established by Dallas and Piertney (1998) : Lut435, Lut457, Lut615, Lut701, Lut717,  Lut833 (set 1) andLut453, Lut604, Lut715, Lut733, Lut832 (set  2). All amplifications were performed in 15 L reactions containing 7.5 L 2× Qiagen Multiplex PCR Master Mix (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany), 0.04 g/L bovine serum albumin (Fermentas, St. Leon-Rot, Germany), 0.2 pmol/L of each primer and 2.5 L template DNA. Microsatellites were amplified in two multiplex PCRs using the following protocol: initial denaturation for 15 min at 95 • C followed by 40 cycles (30 s at 94 • C, 90 s at 55 • C (set 1)/56 • C (set 2), 60 s at 72 • C) and a final extension step for 30 min at 60 • C. Forward primers were labelled with a fluorescent dye (6-FAM, HEX or TAMRA). Fragment length analysis was performed on an ABI Prism ® 377 DNA sequencer (Perkin Elmer, Rodgau, Germany). Genotyping data were analysed using GENESCAN 3.1.2 and GENOTYPER 2.5 software (Applied Biosystems ® , Foster City, USA).
Initially the selected samples were amplified independently in triplicates for all loci and up to 6 additional PCR reactions were performed to determine a sample's consensus genotype if necessary. We accepted a heterozygote genotype when each of both alleles was recorded in at least two independent PCRs and a homozygote genotype after at least three independent observations of a single allele. Accordingly we based the quantification of genotyping errors on consensus genotypes obtained from repeated genotyping. Frequency of allelic dropout (ADO) and false alleles (FA) were computed using the equations in Broquet and Petit (2004) and rates for PCR amplification success, ADO and FA were calculated for each locus across all samples and for each sample across all loci. The probability of identity (P ID ) and probability of identity for siblings (P IDsibs ), which is a more conservative upper bound for the probability of identity (Taberlet and Luikart, 1999;Waits et al., 2001), were calculated using the software GIMLET (Valière, 2002). We used the software GenAlEx 6.5 (Peakall andSmouse, 2006, 2012) to characterise genetic variation within the study sites providing  2).
For sex identification we amplified a part of the SRY locus (Dallas et al., 2000) and the microsatellite Lut832 as a positive PCR control for female samples in a multiplex PCR. A 15 L reaction was performed consisting of 1.5 L PCR buffer, 0.2 mM dNTPs, 3 mM MgCl 2 , 0.04 g/L bovine serum albumin, 0.08 U/L FIREPol ® DNA Polymerase (Solis Biodyne, Tartu, Estonia), 0.2 pmol/L of the microsatellite locus primers, 0.4 pmol/L for Lut-SRY primers and 2 L of template DNA. The PCR programme used: initial denaturation for 3 min at 94 • C, 40 cycles (30 s at 94 • C, 90 s at 53 • C, 30 s at 72 • C) and a final extension step for 3 min at 72 • C.
Individuals defined by assigning a unique multilocus genotype derived from microsatellite and SRY analysis were tested for possible parent-offspring combinations by the complete exclusion method based on Mendelian rules of inheritance. We compared multilocus genotypes to each other and parent-offspring combinations were rejected if a candidate parent does not share at least one allele with the offspring at any locus under consideration (Jones et al., 2010).
We additionally estimated population sizes by capture-markrecapture (CMR) analysis using the programme CAPWIRE (Miller et al., 2005) to evaluate if the detected otter individuals represent the populations adequately in both study sites. This software takes into account multiple capture events per sampling occasion. Otter population size was calculated separately for each study site. A "recapture" was recorded whenever an identical genotype was found in another DNA sample. A likelihood ratio test (p < 0.05) was used to choose between two models concerning capture heterogeneity: the even capture probability model (ECM) and the two innate rates model (TIRM). Confidence intervals were estimated using a parametric bootstrap procedure.

[SECTION] prey fish populations
Size and composition of prey fish populations were estimated based on electrofishing data obtained for stream sections at Kleiner Kamp between 2006 and 2011 and at Große Ysper between 2003 and 2008 (Fig. 1). Although the data sets cover different time periods a comparison is legitimate because in both streams fisheries management did not change throughout the whole period investigated. Sampling stretches (lengths range from 80 to 198 m) were selected to be representative according to habitat distribution. By weighting a representative amount of fish individuals of every length cohort a length-weight relationship formula was created for body mass calculation. All data on fish originated from autumn samplings. For each data set fish biomass was estimated according to DeLury (1951) or Seber and Le Cren (1967), depending on the number of electrofishing runs per stretch. By exploratory data analysis we compared the fish biomass between the studied streams to ascertain tendencies of differences in food availability for otters caused by stocking and tested for differences applying a Mann-Whitney-U-test. Moreover we show length frequency distribution for the dominant species brown trout to analyse population structure for both studied streams.

[SECTION] quality of samples and characteristics of genetic markers
DNA was extracted from a total of 164 otter spraints (68 samples from the study site Kleiner Kamp, 96 from Große Ysper). 77 samples (46.9%) were excluded after DNA quantification as they contained <5 pg/L target DNA. 81 of the samples left were genotyped successfully for all microsatellite loci (i.e. 49.4% of all collected faeces): 33 samples for study site Kleiner Kamp and 48 for Große Ysper. Another 6 samples were rejected due to incomplete genotypes.
Overall all microsatellite loci were polymorphic with the number of alleles per locus ranging from 2 to 5. Expected heterozygosity ranged between 0.48 and 0.53 and observed heterozygosity ranged from 0.54 to 0.61 for the two study sites, respectively (Table 2). These values correspond well to those of values of related studies (e.g. Janssens et al., 2008;Hájková et al., 2009;Honnen et al., 2011). Mean PCR success rate across all loci was 92.0%. Mean frequency of ADO per locus varied from 8.3% for Lut435 to 23.3% for Lut833. FA were recorded with a frequency from 0.3% for Lut715 up to 6.5% for Lut435. P ID and P IDsibs for eleven microsatellite markers based on allele frequencies in our data set were 6.45 × 10 -8 and 1.38 × 10 -3 respectively.

[SECTION] otter numbers and sex identification
Successfully genotyped samples revealed 6 different genotypes (K1-K6) for the study site Kleiner Kamp. From these we identified 3 male otters, 2 females, one not specified. At the study site Große Ysper 8 different otter individuals (Y1-Y8) were detected -3 males and 5 females (Fig. 2). The number of genotyped faeces per individual varied from 1 to 17 (Fig. 2), indicating considerable capture heterogeneity among individuals.
Using the likelihood ratio test for capture heterogeneity, for both study sites the TIRM model was selected (with p = 0.031 for Kleiner Kamp and p = 0.00 for Große Ysper). The CAPWIRE point estimate of population size for Kleiner Kamp site was 6 otters with a 95% confidence interval of zero. This perfectly coincides with the number of detected genotypes. For the second study site Große Ysper the population size estimate generated by CAPWIRE was 8 individuals with an upper confidence boundary of 9 otter individuals. The CAPWIRE point estimate as well as the lower confidence boundary corresponds to the number of genotypes obtained.

[SECTION] spatial and social organisation and densities of resident otters
Among the 14 identified otter individuals 11 were detected over the entire sampling time. They were defined as resident animals. Hence, there were 4 resident otters at study site Kleiner Kamp and 7 residents at study site Große Ysper (Fig. 2). Individuals represented only in a single sampling period and not fitting into the pedigree of resident otters were defined as transient animals.
The stream lengths between the outermost detection points represent minimum home ranges for each otter individual. The spatial distribution found suggests a typical spacing pattern for mustelids (Powell, 1979) with hardly overlapping intrasexual territories and territory overlap between sexes. However, we observed high territory overlaps between individuals of the same sex for Y1/Y4 (♂) and Y5/Y6 (♀). Complete exclusion for parentage analysis based on microsatellite data revealed an existing family group with Y1 and Y5 as parents of two offspring, Y4 and Y6.
We determined otter numbers per stream length using the numbers of otter individuals identified within each study site (Table 1). Focusing on the numbers of resident otters, we found a one-third higher otter density for Große Ysper, the study site where intensive fish stocking is carried out.

[SECTION] fish biomass and population status
Population structure of fish sizes of brown trout indicated natural reproduction and no deficits in the year-class abundances (Fig. 3). According to regions of the epi-and metarhithral fish species composition is dominated by brown trout regarding the fish biomass (Kleiner Kamp: mean 81.5%, Große Ysper: mean 95.1%) as well as abundance (data not shown). For the study site Kleiner Kamp other stock building species bullhead, burbot (Lota lota) and grayling (Thymallus thymallus) were recorded, which made up to 49.5% of fish biomass depending on the stream section. At Große Ysper bullheads were registered as second stock building species.
Despite intensive stocking at Große Ysper, specimen of rainbow trout and brook trout were missing completely or were detected only by single captures. Additionally the proportion of catchable sized brown trout did not differ between the streams (U = 38, p = 0.857) and averaged 28.4% of brown trout biomass in Kleiner Kamp and 27.1% in Große Ysper (Table 3). Comparing fish biomass of all fish species and sizes per year a tendency for a higher fish biomass for study site Große Ysper was recorded, which however, cannot be referred to stocking measures of catchable sized fish (see Fig. 3).

