[SECTION] study site
The Serra da Capivara National Park (SCNP) is located in the south of the state of Piauí, north-east Brazil (Fig. 1). It protects 129,140 ha of the Caatinga, a semi-arid biome contained entirely within Brazil. Temperatures can reach as high as 45 °C, the rainy season is from October to April (Emperaire, 1985), and mean total annual precipitation is 644 mm (SMAPR, 1994). A 6 to 10-m-tall shrubby vegetation predominates the vegetation of the park (Emperaire, 1985). Altitude ranges from 280 to 600 m and the topography consists of a main plateau bounded by 50-to 200-m cliffs and dissected by valleys and canyons. There is no natural per-manent water within the Park but a system of artificial waterholes has been constructed over the past 15 years.

[SECTION] field surveys and data preparation
From August to October 2007, we set up 20 camera-trap stations along the roads of the southern and central part of SCNP, covering an area of approximately 205 km 2 (Fig. 1), as described in detail by Silveira et al. (2009). Each station consisted of two passive-sensor Camtrakker (CamTrack South Inc., Watkinsville, USA) camera traps, model Original 35 mm, facing each other to capture both flanks of a passing animal. Stations were spaced at approximately 3 km and checked every 15 days over 92 days. From the photographs we constructed individual and trap station specific detection histories, containing the number of times each individual was photographed at each trap. To account for occasional camera trap failure we also recorded the number of days each camera trap station was functional over the total survey period.
Between November 10 and December 3 2008 we collected scats in SCNP with the help of scat detector dogs (Long et al., 2007;Smith et al., 2001), trained to search for scats from jaguar and puma. One dog-handler team walked 180.94 km during 21 transects along the roads of SCNP, covering an area of approximately 506 km 2 . The scat survey area overlapped largely with the camera trap survey area (Fig. 1). The largest portion of each scat was stored frozen for dietary analysis, and a small portion was stored in 96% ethanol for subsequent genetic analysis. DNA was extracted using protocols based on the GuSCN/silica method (Boom et al., 1990;Höss and Pääbo, 1993;Frantz et al., 2003). Posterior species identification was carried out using an optimized PCR-based protocol as described in Roques et al. (2011). Sex was identified using the method proposed by Pilgrim et al. (2005) based on the size difference between the male and female Amelogenin gene, but using newly design primers (Roques et al., accepted for publication). For individual genotyping, an optimized set of 11 microsatellite markers (Menotti-Raymond et al.. 1999) was used as described in Roques et al. (accepted for publication).
To bring the dataset of both methods into a comparable format, we followed the approach by Russell et al. (2012) for unstructured spatial sampling (as opposed to having a fixed grid of sampling devices as in camera-trapping): We divided the study area into a grid with cell size of 2 Â 2 km and treated the center of each grid cell as a 'trap'. We assigned each scat to the center coordinate of the cell it was found in and then constructed an individual and grid cell specific encounter history containing the number of scats that were found for each individual in each grid cell. We tested other grid cell sizes (1 Â 1 km and 3 Â 3 km) but found no effect of grid resolution on density estimates. To account for varying spatial sampling effort we calculated the distance walked by the dog-handler team in each grid cell.

[SECTION] model
To analyze data, we formulated a joint spatial capture-recapture (SCR) model as described in Gopalaswamy et al. (2012). SCR models assume that each individual i has an activity center s i , characterized by a pair of coordinates. All s are located within the statespace S, an area encompassing the trapping grid, which has to be chosen large enough so as to include all individuals that could have been exposed to the trapping grid. In our analysis we buffered the most extreme coordinates of the scat locations and the camera trap grid by 30 km to define S.
In the following, the superscript C denotes data and parameters pertaining to camera trapping, G denotes the scat survey, and B denotes parameters that are shared by both sampling types. We assume that for both methods the observed encounter history for individual i at trap/grid cell j, y ij , are mutually independent outcomes of a Poisson random variable,
where variation in k ij is modeled as a function of the distance of trap/grid cell j to s i , d ij . Particularly, we use a Gaussian kernel (also referred to as half-normal function) of the form:
The k 0sex are the respective baseline encounter rates (the expected encounter rate of an individual with a trap or at a grid cell center if that trap/cell center were located precisely at the individual's activity center) and we allowed this parameter to be sex-specific. Since the detection process differs between methods, we assigned each data type a separate baseline encounter rate. Because we cannot associate photographic images of an individual jaguar with its scat samples, and because home ranges and therefore activity centers of individuals can shift over time, we allowed for independent individual activity centers across the two surveys, hence we have two sets of distances, d C ij and d G ij . The parameter r sex (units of the trapping grid, here km) is the scale parameter of the Gaussian kernel and is related to animal home range radius (Reppucci et al., 2011). We expect that home ranges differ between the sexes and thus allow males and females to have separate r.
If we assume that movement remains constant across the two surveys, we can model r as a shared parameter of both detection models for camera trapping and scat sampling, so that it is informed by both types of data. The variable eff j is the sampling effort at site j, for the camera traps the number of days the station was functional, for the scat survey the distance walked by the dog-handler team in cell j.
We estimate N (the number of activity centers in S) for each survey separately to account for possible changes in population size between the two surveys. To do so, we used a Bayesian analysis by data augmentation of the model (Royle and Dorazio, 2012;Royle et al., 2007). In data augmentation, we let M be a number that is larger than the largest possible population size N in S, and n be the number of detected individuals. We assume a prior distribution for N that is discrete-uniform over the interval (0, M) and augment the observed data set with M -n individuals that were never detected and thus have encounter histories that are all zero. For all M potential individuals we introduce an auxiliary variable, z i , which is 1 if the animal is part of the population and 0 if it is not. N is then the sum over all z. M is adequately large when estimates of N are not limited by M. Density D can be derived by dividing N by the area of S. Sex is coded as a binary variable, with 1 for males and 0 for females. Sex for the augmented individuals is treated as missing data and estimated as a Bernoulli random variable with probability p, which represents the proportion of males in the population (Gardner et al., 2010;Sollmann et al., 2011). Again, it seems biologically reasonable to assume that the sex ratio of a long lived species does not change significantly over the course of a year, so that we can estimate p from the joint camera trapping and scat survey data set.
We ran separate models for only the camera-trapping and only the scat data, as well as a joint model for the combined data. We implemented the models in the software WinBUGS (Gilks et al., 1994) accessed through R 2.13.0 (R Development Core Team, 2011) using the package R2WinBUGS (Sturtz et al., 2005). We ran 3 parallel Markov chains with 30,000 iterations each, a burn-in of 10,000 iterations and a thinning rate of 3. For all parameters we report posterior means and standard deviations, as well as 2.5 and 97.5 percentiles, which mark the 95% Bayesian Credible Intervals (BCI). We consider parameters to be significantly different when their 95% BCI do not overlap.

[SECTION] data
Camera traps accumulated 1450 trap days, during which we obtained 72 photographs of 13 jaguars (4 females and 6 males; 3 unidentified). Individual photo-frequencies ranged from 1 to 17. Eighty-two potential jaguar scats were collected, and for 57 of them species could be identified (4 and 53 were puma and jaguar scats, respectively). Forty-seven jaguar scats were assigned to 16 individuals (6 females and 10 males), with individual scat frequencies ranging from 1 to 11.

[SECTION] table 1
Posterior summaries of SCR model parameters for camera trapping data, scat data and combined data; we present the posterior mean, the standard deviation (SD) and the 2.5%, 50% and 97.5% intervals for the baseline encounter rate (k 0 ), the half normal scale parameter (r), the probability of being a male (p) and density (D). to the non-spatial estimate by Silveira et al. (2009), we see that the spatial model returns a density estimate similar to the non-spatial model with the full mean maximum distance moved (MMDM; 1.28 ± 0.62 individuals per 100 km 2 ). This confirms findings of other studies that report the full MMDM to be a better representation of jaguar movement that the half MMDM (e.g., Soisalo and Cavalcanti, 2006;Tobler and Powell, 2013). Jaguar density in the SCNP compares with estimates from other parts of the species distribution, which range from under 1 individuals per 100 km 2 in areas of central Brazil and the Atlantic Forest (Paviolo et al., 2008;Sollmann et al., 2011) to 7-8 individuals per 100 km 2 in the Brazilian Pantanal (Soisalo and Cavalcanti, 2006) and the Belizean rainforest (Silver et al., 2004). Considering that the semi-arid Caatinga represents somewhat marginal habitat for the jaguar, density estimates in the SCNP are surprisingly high. This may be a result of the presence of permanent artificial waterholes in the Park, in combination with strong and effective poaching controls that have been implemented since 2000 (Silveira et al., 2009). These management measures likely helped prey populations to recover from previously low numbers (Wolff, 2001), thereby also benefitting the local jaguar population. As such, SCNP appears to be an important regional refuge for the Critically Endangered Caatinga jaguar.

[SECTION] mean
Although in the present case density estimates were similar across modeling approaches, a major disadvantage of non-spatial capture-recapture models, especially when used for wide-ranging species, is the need to use ad hoc approaches like the MMDM to estimate the area surveyed. These estimates depend heavily on trap spacing and the size of the trap array relative to animal home range size, and ideally, the trap array should cover at least four times the average home range (e.g., Bondrup-Nielsen, 1983;Dillon and Kelly, 2007;Maffei and Noss, 2008). SCR models are much more robust to these issues of spatial study design (Sollmann et al., 2012). Our analysis showed that SCR models produced more precise density estimates, for the combined data set, but also when applied to the camera-trap data set alone: the CV for the non-spatial estimate was 37% (Silveira et al., 2009), whereas for the spatial cameras-only estimate is was 32%, and 27% for the combined analysis. Precision in estimating density is important when monitoring populations, as it determines our ability to detect changes in the population of interest.

