[SECTION] methods
We undertook 51 transect surveys of macropods in Queensland, Australia (Fig. 1). Surveys were conducted during the dry season from June through to September 2011 to avoid unfavourable weather conditions and ensure vehicle access was available for remote sites. Transects were spread across four Köppen climate zones; equatorial (number of transects (n) = 19), tropical (n = 17), subtropical (n = 9) and grassland (n = 6). The macropod species of interest were Macropus agilis, M. antilopinus, M. giganteus and M. robustus. Survey site locations were chosen primarily to establish range correlates of M. antilopinus, however they provide a good representation of environmental and climatic conditions affecting macropods more generally across north-eastern Australia (Menkhorst & Knight 2010).

[SECTION] visual survey
The visual macropod survey techniques were based on Ritchie et al. (2008). Each transect consisted of 5 km of road, infrequently used by other vehicles. Two transects were surveyed at each site, dependent on space and the availability of suitable roads. Based on detectability protocols established in previous macropod occurrence surveys (Ritchie et al. 2008), each transect was surveyed four times over two consecutive days, once in the morning and once in the evening of each day. Morning surveys spanned 0630-0930 and evening surveys spanned 1600-1830 to coincide with the time when macropods are most active (Ritchie et al. 2008). To avoid observing the same animal in separate transects (macropods often move in response to driven transects) we set a minimum distance of 5 km between transects.Transects were driven at <10 km h -1 and macropods were recorded on either side of the transect line by two observers in the tray of an open vehicle. All talking and noise was kept to a minimum to avoid disturbing the animals and potentially biasing visual counts. To avoid observer bias, the same trained observers were used for all surveys. When a macropod was sighted, the observer would signal the vehicle to stop and the species and GPS location were recorded.

[SECTION] indirect genetic survey
Four spatially separated scats were collected at every 1 km point along each transect. Fresh scats were preferentially collected. All scats collected were georeferenced using handheld GPS (WGS 84). Scat samples were placed in individual paper bags in the field and stored in plastic boxes with a silica desiccant before being transported to the University of Adelaide and then frozen at -20°C. A total of 245 scats from the 51 transects were selected for DNA extraction and species identification, one from each available 1 km point. Note that scats could not be located at all 1 km intervals. Species identification of scats was conducted following Wadley et al. (2013), whereby a small amount (2 cm 2 ) of the outer surface of each scat was scraped and removed using a sterile scalpel and 'Bioline fecal ISOLATE' kits (Bioline, London, UK) were used for extracting DNA. Extractions were performed in a DNA extraction laboratory physically separate from PCR-setup and post-PCR laboratories to prevent cross contamination with previously amplified DNA and all extractions included a negative control. All DNA extracts and negative controls were amplified for a 275-bp mtDNA ND2 fragment using macropod specific PCR primers (M496 5′-GCTTGAATAACAAACCAAT GAACCC-3′/M497 5′-CCTCCTCAGCCTCCGAGYAT-3′), digested with three restriction endonucleases (AluI, HphI and BstNI) and examined by gel electrophoresis to determine species (Wadley et al. 2013).

[SECTION] vegetation surveys
Vegetation surveys were conducted on all transects at 1 km intervals using four 1 × 1 m wire quadrats (Ritchie et al. 2008). Two quadrats were placed on either side of each transect at a distance of 25 m and 50 m from the road. The four quadrats were then surveyed for percentage grass cover, grass height and biomass. Percentage grass cover was a comparison of vegetated area versus bare ground within the quadrat. Grass height consisted of two measurements; one conducted in the field to produce quadrat grass height and one from the cut sample used in the biomass calculations.
To determine biomass, 1 8 of the vegetation in the 1 × 1 m quadrat was cut to ground level, collected and dried for 24 h in an oven at 60°C. Weight was measured to 5 g accuracy using a 1 kg Super Samson, Salter Scale. For each quadrat, biomass was then calculated as
Where 'qgh' is quadrat grass height. 'wsgh' is weighed sample grass height. 'sb' is sample biomass. 'gcp' is grass cover percentage. The average of the quadrat biomasses for each transect (n = 24) was then calculate to give transect biomass.

[SECTION] environmental predictors
A candidate set of environmental predictors of macropod presence/absence was selected using published literature (Ritchie & Bolitho 2008;Ritchie et al. 2008Ritchie et al. , 2009) ) and expert advice. To avoid co-linearity among predictors, variables with a Spearman's rank ≥ 0.7 were excluded from the analysis.Where possible, we favoured retaining variables with the strongest ecological support (see Appendix S1). We considered predictors as two classes of variables (i) habitat variables, consisting of slope (in degrees from horizon), distance to closest permanent water (water, in hundred km), relative biomass (biomass), and elevation (elev, metres above sea

[SECTION] statistical analysis
We used generalized linear mixed-effects models (GLMM) with a binomial distribution to identify ecological correlates of species occurrence using (i) molecular presence/absence records (molecular identification) and (ii) a combination of molecular and visual presence/absence records (combined identification), separately. The combined identification records included any additional presence points from the visual survey that were not detected from the indirect genetic survey. We did not model occurrence using visual-only records because models did not meet linear assumptions (see below) for some species. Likelihood ratio tests for mixedeffects models (Crainiceanu & Ruppert 2004) confirmed that Köppen climate zone should be treated as a random effect, not a fixed effect.Thus, models were not simplified to generalized linear models (Pinheiro & Bates 2000). To avoid overparameterizing models, due to the relatively small sample size of occurrence records for each species (n = 51), we initially modelled the likely effect of non-climate habitat variables and anthropogenic human variables separately. After establishing the most parsimonious habitat and anthropogenic human models we then explored, more generally, the relative importance of these types of conditions on occurrence. A similar approach was used elsewhere (Mellin et al. 2012). We compared and ranked models using Akaike's information criterion corrected for small sample size (AICc) (Burnham & Anderson 2002). We assessed each model's probability relative to the entire model set using AICc weights (wAICc), and its structural goodness-of-fit with per cent deviance explained (DEV). All residual distributions met linear model assumptions (assessed using normalized scores of standardized residual deviance using Q-Q plots). All models were implemented using lme4 package (Bates et al. 2012) in the statistical software package R (R Development Core Team 2013).

[SECTION] cost analysis
To compare the economic feasibility of using indirect genetic and visual identification methods we examined the retrospective cost of the two methods. We considered observed expenses for field and laboratory work, salaries and car hire. We acknowledge that costs will be somewhat case study specific. For simplicity we excluded variables such as flights to and from field sites and the purchase of field-work equipment as they were common to both techniques. Although the site surveys were the same for both techniques, we estimated that the duration of time needed for indirect genetic surveys would be substantially less than for the visual surveys. This is because the visual surveys require participants to be located at each site, surveying up to two transects at a time, for at least two days. Visual surveys can only take place in the morning and evening when macropods are most active. Depending on the travel distance between sites an extra day at each site is often required to find and set up each transect and camp. For the indirect genetic survey, sites only need to be visited for a minimal amount of time to ensure transects are located and set up. Scats can be collected and habitat surveyed at each interval point regardless of the time of day. This can result in several transects and sites being completed each day (depending on distance between sites) resulting in a significantly shorter field trip duration compared with the visual survey. The cost involved in hiring a four-wheel drive vehicle for the surveys (visual or indirect genetic) is influenced by the duration of the fieldwork, costed at a daily rate of $195 (AUD), including fuel and safety equipment. Research assistants are needed for fieldwork, costed at $61 880 pa (AUD). For the visual survey, three people are required to maximize detection success, one to drive and two observers in the tray of the vehicle (Ritchie et al. 2008). However, the indirect genetic method only requires two people for the duration of field work.
The indirect genetic method requires samples to undergo laboratory analysis for identification of species. For this study, samples were processed in-house at the University of Adelaide (Wadley et al. 2013). However, for the cost benefit analysis we have used commercial costs from an external source (the Australian Genome Research Facility -AGRF) so as to provide a comparison of surveying cost for those without access to the required laboratory equipment. The laboratory work costing associated with identifying each sample for the in-house analysis is described in detail in Appendix S2.

[SECTION] species occurrence
Both visual and indirect genetic survey methods identified independently four macropod species occurring across the surveyed region in north-eastern Australia (Fig. 2). Both methods identified all four species occurring outside their established ranges, with the most extreme being a M. giganteus scat sample approximately 420 km from its established range. For all species the indirect genetic method provided more presence locations compared with the visual method (i.e. along transects where species were not detected by visual surveys, indirect genetic evidence showed that they do occur in the area). Macropus antilopinus was recorded at 21 sites based on the indirect genetic method, while the visual survey method only identified the species at 15 sites. Indirect genetic methods identifying M. agilis at 27 sites, M. giganteus at 10 sites and M. robustus at 21 sites compared with visual sightings at 16, 7 and 18 sites respectively. The visual survey technique only identified two additional presence points (one for M. giganteus and one for M. robustus) compared with the indirect genetic survey (Fig. 2c,d), with the M. giganteus point possibly being the result of misidentification. The identification of M. giganteus in far northern Queensland is questionable as it is well outside the species established range (>100 km).

[SECTION] occurrence models
Our models show that the molecular identification records can be used to explore how environmental conditions influence the occurrence of macropods (Table 1). The most parsimonious occurrence models explained between 17-43% of model structural deviance, depending on the species.
Anthropogenic human processes are likely to have a larger influence on the occurrence of M. antilopinus than habitat variables in our study area. Land use had the most pronounced influence on M. antilopinus occurrence (land use + [1|zone]: DEV = 17%). There was also good support for including fire in a multi-term model (land use + fire + [1|zone]: dAICc = 1; DEV = 18.88%).
The most parsimonious model for M. agilis occurrence included habitat variables (elevation) as well as anthropogenic human processes (land use) (elev + land use + [1|zone]: DEV = 29.90%). There was also good support for including biomass in the multi-term model (elev + biomass + land use + [1|zone]; dAICc = 0.56; DEV = 32%) and for modelling occurrence as a single-term model using elevation (elev + [1|zone]; dAICc = 1.34; DEV = 24%), alone.
Anthropogenic human processes did not strongly influence the occurrence of M. robustus in our study area. Elevation had the largest influence on M. robustus occurrence (elev + [1|zone]; DEV = 43%). There was also good support for using slope as a predictor of M. robustus occurrence (slope + [1|zone]; dAICc = 1.71; DEV = 41%). Habitat variables also had the strongest influence on the occurrence of M. giganteus. A multi-term model that included biomass, distance to water, slope and elevation explained the greatest variation in occurrence (biomass + water + slope + elev + [1|zone]: DEV = 43%). There was less support for the next ranked model (slope + (1|zone): dAICc = 2.53; DEV = 22%). The GLMM results tables for all candidate models are shown in Appendixes S3-S6.
Combining indirect genetic and visual survey observations (i.e. using the combined identification records) for M. robustus and M. giganteus (the two species where visual surveys provided additional presences) resulted in similar conclusions to the molecular identification results (Appendix S7).The most parsimonious model for M. robustus was elev + (1|zone) (DEV = 45%); and for M. giganteus, it was biomass + water + slope + elev + (1|zone) (DEV = 32%). Interestingly, combining visual and indirect genetic survey data resulted in a poorer model structural fit for M. giganteus compared with the molecular identification model. This may be due to the questionable visual identification record for M. giganteus in far northern Australia (Fig. 2c) affecting the fit of the model.

[SECTION] cost comparison
The cost involved in collecting and identifying the non-invasively collected scat samples for the molecular identification survey was substantially less than the cost involved in conducting a direct visual survey of macropod occurrence (Table 2). The time required to complete the visual survey of the sites was 120 days, while we expect that the field work for the indirect genetic survey would only take 30 days. Even with the added component of out-sourcing laboratory analysis from a commercial company, the indirect genetic surveys would take less time to complete and cost considerably less than the visual surveys (Table 2), while also providing important additional presence Akaike's information criterion corrected for small sample size (AICc), number of parameters (k), difference in AICc compared to the best ranked model (ΔAICc), AICc weights (wi) and percentage of deviance explained (DEV) for the statistical relationship between occurrence and up to three separate sets of variables: habitat, human and habitat + human (Model type). Habitat variables (habitat) were: slope in degrees from horizon (slope); distance (km) to closest permanent water (water); relative biomass (biomass); and elevation in metres above sea level (elev). Human variables (human) were: grazing land or non-grazing land (land use); and number of years the land burnt from 1997-2010, in the late dry season (fire). Köppen climate zone was modelled as a random effect (zone). The best ranked model for each analysis is shaded in grey. The most parsimonious model across Model type is highlighted in bold. See Methods for further details. data (see above). Therefore, the indirect genetic method could survey over three times as many sites as the visual survey for the same cost and time. For researchers with access to in-house genetic facilities the molecular work is substantially cheaper than outsourcing and would provide additional cost savings (see Appendix S2).

