[SECTION] (no title)
Because juvenile demographic parameters can strongly influence the dynamics of populations, data on age-specific patterns of survival and dispersal can improve our understanding of animal ecology and inform conservation strategies. Survival of juveniles, which influences recruitment into the reproductive age classes, is influenced by many factors, including predation, disease, resource limitation, and juvenile dispersal (Caughley 1966, Krebs et al. 1986, Gaillard et al. 1998). Dispersal contributes to genetic and demographic connectivity among populations, and influences recolonization probabilities of habitat patches, which can be critical for persistence of metapopulations (Bowler and Benton 2005). High rates of mortality and natal dispersal behaviors can make monitoring juvenile animals more challenging than monitoring adults (Promislow andHarvey 1990, O'Donoghue 1992), and these difficulties should be considered when implementing monitoring strategies.
Radiotelemetry is a commonly employed technique for monitoring demographics and movements in wildlife species; however, the small size of juvenile animals often limits the weight and size of transmitters that can safely be used (Sikes et al. 2011). Small transmitter size can limit signal strength, battery life, and ability to incorporate additional features such as GPS technology. In addition, continued growth of juveniles can preclude standard designs for attachment of transmitters, necessitating alternative methods such as expandable collars, use of adhesives to attach transmitters, or implantation of telemetry devices (Fuller et al. 2005). For example, glue-on radiotransmitters have been used to study survival and dispersal of juveniles for a variety of small-bodied species, including snowshoe hares (Lepus americanus; O'Donoghue and Boutin 1995), pygmy rabbits (Brachylagus idahoensis; Price et al. 2010), and lemmings (Dicrostonyx groenlandicus; Blackburn et al. 1998).
An alternative monitoring method is noninvasive genetic sampling (NGS), in which DNA is collected from sources that animals leave behind, such as hair or feces (Waits and Paetkau 2005, Schwartz et al. 2007, De Barba et al. 2010). Because animals do not need to be captured or observed, NGS is useful for detecting and monitoring rare and elusive species. Applications for NGS include gathering information about population size (Stenglein et al. 2010), distribution (Litvaitis et al. 2006), dispersal (Douadi et al. 2007, De Barba et al. 2010), kinship (Lucchini et al. 2002, Becker et al. 2012), genetic structure (Triant et al. 2004), and the demographic trends and genetic diversity of populations (De Barba et al. 2010). The utility of NGS is, however, limited by the low quantity and quality of the DNA compared with more invasively collected sources like blood or tissue, and steps must be taken in the sampling design, laboratory, and analysis methods to account for and minimize these impacts (Waits andPaetkau 2005, Valiere et al. 2007). We monitored movements and survival of juvenile pygmy rabbits using both telemetry and NGS methods. The pygmy rabbit is a small-bodied, semi-fossorial lagomorph native to the sagebrush steppe of the western United States. Breeding occurs between February and July, and females typically produce multiple litters of 1 to 9 kits in a single breeding season (Elias et al. 2006(Elias et al. , 2013)). Most juveniles exhibit a distinct natal dispersal within their first 3 months, with females dispersing somewhat farther than males. Although median natal dispersal distances for males and females were 1.0 km and 2.9 km, respectively, individuals have been detected moving up to 12 km (Estes-Zumpf and Rachlow 2009). Previous studies have documented high but variable rates of survival for both adult and juvenile pygmy rabbits across time and space (Westra 2004, Sanchez 2008, Crawford et al. 2010, Price et al. 2010).
The geographically and genetically distinct population segment of pygmy rabbits in the Columbia Basin of central Washington, USA, is listed as endangered at both the state and federal levels, and a reintroduction program is currently underway (Federal Register 2003, USFWS 2012). Monitoring dispersal and survival of the reintroduced individuals, along with reproduction and genetic parameters, is crucial for evaluating recovery efforts and modifying future conservation strategies. The goal of this study was to compare the utility of radiotelemetry and NGS approaches to monitoring survival and dispersal of reintroduced juvenile pygmy rabbits. The 2 methods were implemented over slightly different time periods, and therefore, quantitative estimates of survival and movements are not directly comparable. However, we provide cost estimates and an assessment of qualitative differences in the information obtained. We expected telemetry to provide reliable information about postrelease settlement and mortality. Because of documented patterns of DNA degradation (DeMay et al. 2013), we predicted that surveying for pellets during winter following a fresh snowfall would lead to high success rates for genetic analyses. Finally, we predicted that telemetry would cost more than NGS overall and per rabbit because of the relatively high cost for radiotransmitters compared with genetic analysis. Understanding the costs and benefits of complementary monitoring approaches can help managers to choose among potential methods to design and execute monitoring protocols to support recovery of uncommon species.

[SECTION] study area
This study took place at the Sagebrush Flat (SBF) Wildlife Area (approximately 15 km 2 ) in the Columbia Basin of central Washington, USA, where temperatures range from an average minimum of À5.98 C in January to an average maximum of 31.68 C in July (WRCC 2013). The climate is semiarid and averages about 20 cm of annual precipitation, over half of which is typically from snow (WDFW 2006, WRCC 2013). The landscape is dominated by 'mima mounds', mounds of deep soils, and dense sagebrush with relatively sparse and low-growing vegetation between mounds (Tullis 1995). At SBF, pygmy rabbit burrow systems are almost exclusively located on mima mounds. The site is surrounded by state, federal, and private lands, with a land-cover mosaic of sagebrush steppe and dryland wheat fields. Predators of pygmy rabbits on SBF included badgers (Taxidea taxus), long-tailed weasels (Mustela frenata), coyotes (Canis latrans), and several raptor species. Two large (2.3 and 4.4 ha) predator-resistant enclosures constructed on SBF served as breeding enclosures for a semiwild adult pygmy rabbit population (WDFW 2011). Enclosure fences were buried approximately 45 cm into the ground and featured a 'floppy top' design to protect against terrestrial predators, while protective netting over pygmy rabbit burrow systems and bird spikes installed on fence posts discouraged avian predators.

[SECTION] field methods
From May to July 2012, we captured 104 juvenile pygmy rabbits (kits) born in the breeding enclosures for release onto SBF. Prior to release, we weighed and sexed kits, treated them for parasites, and sampled each for DNA with a 3-mm biopsy punch in the ear. Tissue samples were stored in 95% ethanol and frozen at À208 C until laboratory analysis.
Of the 104 kits released, we fitted 85 with radiotransmitters (Holohil Systems Ltd., Carp, ON, Canada) glued onto their backs. Transmitters, ranging in weight from 1 g to 4 g, were first glued to mesh window screening with 'wings' to increase surface area for attachment (Estes-Zumpf and Rachlow 2007). Kits fitted with 1-g, 2-g, 3-g, and 4-g transmitters weighed on average 164 g, 191 g, 254 g, and 272 g, respectively. We did not use strict weight categories to assign transmitters because of the limited availability of all transmitter sizes at any given time. A viscous livestock adhesive (Kamar Inc., Zionsville, IN) was used to attach the transmitters to the mesh, and we trimmed the mesh wings to fit to each rabbit so as not to impede movement. We used Loctite adhesive (Henkel Corp., Westlake, OH) to attach the mesh to the rabbit's back and glue fur over the top of the transmitter. Transmitters were reused on multiple rabbits throughout the release season as they were recovered.
Release sites were located between 35 m and 650 m from the breeding enclosures, and we used both soft and hard release methods. We housed soft-released juveniles singly or in pairs in 2.5-m-diameter soft-release enclosures for 7 days prior to release. After 7 days, we breached the enclosures so rabbits could exit and return freely. In comparison, our hardrelease strategy did not involve an acclimatization period in an enclosure. We provided artificial burrows, auger holes, and supplemental food at hard-release sites. We placed kits individually inside artificial burrows, plugged both entrances with burlap, and left them to acclimate to the burrow for approximately 5 min, after which we quietly removed the burlap. We did this to allow individuals to recover from the stress of being transported and to increase the probability that kits would stay close to their release sites. Although we used 2 release methods initially, a lack of differences in residency and survival between the hard and soft releases prompted a discontinuation of the use of soft-release pens in June of 2012 (unpublished data). We used telemetry to track the movements of radiotagged kits on SBF. We located kits every 2 days for the first week postrelease, and then at least twice per week in subsequent weeks until transmitters were recovered. To minimize disturbance of animals, we obtained precise locations only once per week, during which we either obtained visual confirmation that the rabbits were alive, or recovered transmitters. During nonvisual tracking days, we recorded if the rabbit was in the same general area as the last known location or if it had moved, but did not approach close enough for visual confirmation. We conducted one aerial telemetry flight, covering 333 km 2 on and around the release site, during the monitoring period to attempt to locate missing individuals. Unlike Estes-Zumpf and Rachlow (2007), we did not recapture kits to reglue or replace transmitters because recapture was deemed risky for recovery of this endangered population; recapture could cause stress, discourage residency, or draw the attention of predators. These methods were approved by the University of Idaho Animal Care and Use Committee (Protocol 2012-23) and are consistent with standards for use of wild mammals in research established by the American Society of Mammalogists (Sikes et al. 2011).
During December 2012 and January 2013, after fresh snowfall, we conducted surveys on and around the release sites to locate active burrows and collect fecal pellets for genetic analysis. We surveyed along 50-m-wide belt transects oriented north to south, prioritizing the release area and working outward as time allowed, reaching a maximum of 2.4 km from the center of the release area. We also surveyed specific drainages with dense sagebrush outside of the belt transect area, reaching a maximum of 3.6 km from the center of the release area. Rabbit tracks, active burrows, and fecal pellets were conspicuous on fresh snow during surveys. Burrows were considered active if they exhibited fresh rabbit sign including tracks, fecal pellets on top of snow, and digging (Sanchez et al. 2009, Price andRachlow 2011). We collected fecal pellet samples from the snow surface and ! 4 pellets/sample were collected when possible to ensure an adequate amount of DNA for analysis (Adams et al. 2011). Samples were stored in paper coin envelopes and desiccated with silica gel beads until laboratory analysis.

[SECTION] laboratory methods
We acquired genotypes for all released pygmy rabbits from tissue samples and created a reference database containing genetic and demographic information for each individual in the recovery project. We halved each 3-mm tissue punch and extracted DNA from one half using Qiagen DNeasy blood and tissue kits (Qiagen Inc., Valencia, CA), while the other half was retained for archiving or re-extraction. Each extraction batch included an extraction negative to test for contamination (Taberlet and Luikart 1999, Waits and Paetkau 2005, Beja-Pereira et al. 2009). Tissue DNA was amplified in duplicate at 22 loci in 3 PCR multiplexes: 21 polymorphic microsatellite loci and 1 Y-chromosome microsatellite used for sex identification, which agreed with sex identification based on morphological features (see online Supplemental Information for multiplex development). These loci include 7 with primers developed for other rabbit species and cross-amplified in pygmy rabbits (7LID3, Korstanje 2003;Sat5, Sat7, Sat8, Mougel et al. 1997;Sol08, Rico et al. 1994;Sol44, Surridge et al. 1997;Y05, Putze et al. 2007), 9 previously developed for pygmy rabbits (A10, A121, A124, A133, A2, D103, D118, D121, and D126; Estes-Zumpf et al. 2008), and 6 new loci with primers developed for this pygmy rabbit monitoring program (A113, A12, A128, A129, A140, and D2; GenBank accession numbers KM871174-KM871179). Primers for loci A10, D118, and D121 were redesigned to produce shorter fragment lengths appropriate for noninvasively collected DNA (Buchan et al. 2005). Samples were run on an Applied Biosystems 3130xl Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems Inc., Foster City, CA), and results were viewed in Genemapper 3.7 (Applied Biosystems Inc.) and checked visually. We extracted DNA from the surface of ! 4 fecal pellets/ sample when possible using the Qiagen QIAamp DNA stool mini kit (Qiagen Inc.) in a laboratory dedicated to lowquantity DNA samples, and an extraction negative was included in each extraction batch to test for contamination (Waits and Paetkau 2005). To determine species, we amplified a 294 base-pair fragment of cytochrome B from the mitochondrial genome in a species ID test designed to distinguish between pygmy rabbits and sympatric cottontail rabbit species (Sylvilagus nuttallii, S. audubonii, S. floridanus; Adams et al. 2011). For samples confirmed as pygmy rabbit pellets, we amplified 8 loci in one PCR multiplex (PyRbM1) and analyzed the results using the same protocol as tissue samples. Cottontail samples and samples that failed to yield a species ID result were excluded from further analysis.
Initially, we ran 4 repetitions for each NGS sample, and completed more as needed to acquire consensus genotypes for ! 5 of the polymorphic microsatellite loci to achieve a probability of identity siblings (PIDsib; Waits et al. 2001) value of < 0.01 (i.e., probability of < 1% that 2 siblings would match at the genotyped loci). We required 2 repeats of each allele to confirm a heterozygous genotype and 4 repeats to confirm a homozygous genotype based on pilot work showing high allelic dropout rates in pygmy rabbit fecal DNA during summer conditions (DeMay et al. 2013). If half of the tested loci did not initially amplify in a given sample, we dropped that sample from further analysis. Fecal sample genotypes were matched with reference (tissue) genotypes using Genalex 6.5 software (Peakall andSmouse 2006, 2012). We checked matches individually, and any pairings with mismatches at 1 or 2 loci were investigated further to determine whether human error or allelic dropout could have caused false mismatches. If the only mismatch between 2 samples appeared to be due to allelic dropout, we considered it a match.
Fecal samples that did not match a previously sampled rabbit were amplified at all loci, checked for 95% reliability using RELIOTYPE (Miller et al. 2005), added to the database as new wild-born individuals, and analyzed for parentage using a strict exclusion approach in Cervus 3.0 (Marshall et al. 1998, Kalinowski et al. 2007).

[SECTION] data analysis
We used telemetry data to quantify postrelease movement and mortality of individuals fitted with transmitters. To quantify distance moved, we measured the linear distance from the release site to the settlement site and to the transmitter recovery location for each monitored rabbit, assuming that the rabbit was at that location and the transmitter was not carried there by a predator. Estes-Zumpf and Rachlow (2009) reported that most juvenile pygmy rabbits initiated and completed natal dispersal within 1 week, after which they remained fairly stationary. Consequently, released pygmy rabbits were considered settled when they were tracked to one mima mound or adjacent mounds (within 100 m) for 3 or more consecutive visual locations, corresponding to ! 2 weeks on the same or adjacent mounds. When a settled pygmy rabbit was located on adjacent mounds for consecutive locations, we selected for measurement either the mound at which they were most frequently located, or if they were located at adjacent mounds with equal frequencies, the most recent location. We also noted the duration (days) of transmitter retention, which was estimated conservatively to the last visual location of the individual before transmitter recovery. To estimate immediate postrelease mortality, we attempted to determine, based on condition of recovered transmitters and surrounding evidence, whether or not transmitters were removed by predators (Crawford et al. 2010).
For NGS samples collected on snow, we measured the distance between the individual's release site and the location of the active burrow where we collected the fecal sample. If multiple samples were collected from the same individual, we took the average distance from release site to all active burrow systems where fecal samples from that individual were collected. For rabbits that were tracked or detected with both methods, we measured the distance between their NGS sample location and location where we recovered their radiotransmitter (or their last visual location if their transmitter signal had later been lost) to estimate the amount of movement between monitoring periods (summer telemetry and winter NGS). For settled rabbits, we measured the distance between telemetry settlement site and NGS location to investigate whether settled rabbits continued to move between summer and winter.

[SECTION] cost calculation
We report the total cost per method for this study, as well as the cost per animal tracked and per animal detected. For telemetry, we defined the number of animals tracked as every individual released with a transmitter. The number of animals detected was defined as all individuals from which we were able to recover a transmitter. For NGS, we defined the number of animals tracked as all released individuals, and the number of animals detected as all individuals that we identified from fecal DNA collected during winter. The number of animals we were able to track was actually higher than the number of animals released, because with NGS it was possible to detect previously unsampled individuals already present on the landscape. Finally, we report the per sample costs for laboratory supplies and labor for each of our genetic sample types. Our calculated costs for each method exclude the costs for time and supplies required to capture and release kits, which were common to both monitoring methods.
Telemetry costs included the purchase of transmitters and supplies for transmitter attachment, personnel hours for monitoring, one telemetry flight, and vehicle fuel. We included fuel costs only when we were actively tracking rabbits; fuel for transportation to and from the study area was excluded because telemetry was combined with other field and husbandry activities at SBF. For our reported cost estimate, we assumed that each individual received a unique transmitter, while in fact we reduced costs by reusing transmitters on multiple rabbits throughout the season.
The cost estimate for NGS included supplies for collecting tissue and fecal samples, laboratory supplies and labor, and personnel costs for winter surveys. Our laboratory costs are likely lower than commercial rates because they do not include overhead, or equipment upkeep. We also did not include development and optimization of the microsatellite markers. These up-front optimization costs will vary among studies depending upon availability of microsatellite loci, genetic variation within the study species or population, and the research questions being asked. Our estimates do not include capital equipment costs like vehicles and receivers for telemetry or laboratory equipment for genetic analysis.

[SECTION] telemetry
Telemetry monitoring of released rabbits lasted from mid-May until mid-September when the last transmitter was recovered. Throughout the monitoring period, we tracked and recovered transmitters from 63 individuals, while signals were lost from the remaining 22 individuals. Transmitters were retained on the rabbits for an average of 15 days, although one transmitter was retained for 87 days. The condition of most recovered transmitters was ambiguous, and we were unable to classify whether or not they had been removed by predators. We recovered one transmitter that was cracked with inner wires exposed, suggesting a predator with powerful jaw strength, and one that was recovered near a gut pile typical of an avian predator; however, we documented no other strong evidence of predation. Characteristics that potentially indicated predation, such as large amounts of fur on recovered transmitters and chewed off 'wings,' were not diagnostic of predation, as evidenced by NGS detection of individuals during winter that were presumed dead during summer based on these criteria.
Most monitored rabbits remained near the release site, with 9 individuals moving >1 km and only 2 moving >3 km (max. ¼ 7.8 km; Fig. 1a). Using our settlement criteria, 14 rabbits settled by the time their transmitters were recovered. Settlement sites ranged from 0 m to 1.5 km from release sites, with an average distance of 204 m (Fig. 1b). Rabbits that were detected moving longer distances (> 1.5 km) did not settle before their transmitters were recovered or we lost their signals.

[SECTION] noninvasive genetic sampling
During winter, we surveyed for rabbit sign around the release site and collected 117 fecal samples for genetic analysis. Excluding samples identified as cottontail (n ¼ 6), 86% of samples yielded a successful individual identification. We identified 42 individuals, including 38 juveniles from the summer releases, indicating 37% minimum survival to winter. Released rabbits that we detected included 8 kits released without transmitters, 8 with lost transmitter signals, and 2 presumed dead based on the condition of recovered transmitters. We also identified 4 individuals that did not match any of our released rabbits. Parentage analysis confirmed that these individuals were born in the wild from parents released 2 summers previously (parent pair nonexclusion probability for full suite of loci ¼ 9.74 Â 10 À15 ). Four loci exhibited high frequencies of null alleles and were either dropped from our multiplexes (A10, D121, D126) or excluded from parentage analysis (A124).
Winter NGS samples were collected an average of 833 m from release sites (range ¼ 80 m to 2.6 km; Fig. 1c). For rabbits that were tracked with telemetry and subsequently detected with NGS (n ¼ 30), NGS samples were on average 522 m from the transmitter recovery location (or last telemetry location if the signal was subsequently lost) for the same rabbit (range ¼ 1 m-1.7 km). When we considered only those rabbits that had settled during the summer, the average distance from NGS sample to settlement site fell to 445 m. This average was skewed by one rabbit moving 1.7 km from its settlement site (Fig. 1d). Excluding this individual, all other settled rabbits (n ¼ 5) were detected with NGS within 250 m of their summer settlement sites.

[SECTION] costs
We calculated the total cost (US dollars) for each method as well as costs per rabbit tracked and detected (see online Supplemental Information for itemized costs). Telemetry costs were $21,817, or $257/rabbit tracked (n ¼ 85) and $346/rabbit detected (n ¼ 63). The cost of NGS was $12,744, or $123/rabbit tracked (n ¼ 104) and $303/rabbit detected (n ¼ 42). The per-sample costs for NGS were $13 (pellets, species ID only), $25 (pellets, species ID, and one microsatellite multiplex to match with a previously sampled individual), $56 (pellets, species ID and 3 multiplexes for a new individual), and $21 (tissue, 3 multiplexes for a new individual).

[SECTION] telemetry
Telemetry allowed us to investigate dispersal of released individuals during the first few weeks after release. Because transmitter attachment necessitates handling individuals, telemetry provided the added benefit of being able to assess physical condition and take biological measurements, which can be included as covariates in downstream analyses. Our ability to assess dispersal was limited by short transmitter retention time ( x ¼ 15 days), and only 16% of tagged rabbits settled while we were tracking them. Our average retention time was lower than that documented by Estes-Zumpf and Rachlow (2007), where only 10% of glue-on transmitters fell off juvenile pygmy rabbits in 14 days, similar to those for transmitters glued-on snowshoe hare leverets (approximately 14 days if not recaptured; O'Donoghue 1994) and lesser horseshoe bats (Rhinolophus hipposideros, 2-16 days; Bontadina et al. 2002), and greater than retention times for similar transmitters on lemmings (3-7 days; Blackburn et al. 1998).
We were unable to reliably detect mortality events because of the ambiguous condition of recovered transmitters. We did not recapture kits to reglue transmitters or swap the glueon transmitter for a radiocollar upon reaching adult size, although we recommend doing this in certain scenarios. Doing so would have improved both our transmitter retention time and our ability to detect predation, but recapture in the wild was judged to be too risky to the recovery of this endangered population. Estes-Zumpf andRachlow (2007, 2009) were able to identify predation events from glue-on transmitters recovered from juvenile pygmy rabbits in a nonendangered population in Idaho, USA, and were able to attribute 58% of the predation events specifically to either avian or mammalian predators. In our study, we rarely detected evidence of predation at recovered transmitters, indicating that either predators consumed or carried away the entire animal, or that most of the transmitters had simply fallen off.
Other characteristics specific to our study species and environment impacted the effectiveness of telemetry. First, the small size of juvenile pygmy rabbits necessitated the use of small transmitters with a limited battery life and weak signal strength compared with larger transmitters. Battery life was not a problem in our study because transmitters fell off of rabbits before the batteries would have failed (6 weeks to 6 months for 1-g-4-g transmitters, respectively). Challenges due to weak signal strength were amplified by the hilly topography at our study site, fossorial behavior of pygmy rabbits, and their ability to make rapid long-distance movements (Estes-Zumpf and Rachlow 2009). Small transmitters are also limited in the extra features they can include, notably mortality sensors and GPS with remote download capabilities, which can increase the spatial and temporal resolution of telemetry data.

[SECTION] noninvasive genetic sampling
Noninvasive genetic sampling proved effective for longer term monitoring goals and will allow further research into postrelease survival, reproduction, and population expansion, but cannot provide information about immediate postrelease movement or survival. Because genetic tags are not lost, individuals can be detected using NGS throughout their life and long-term study questions about survival, reproduction, movement, and genetic diversity can be investigated. Such long-term monitoring questions have been addressed with NGS for many species, including wolves (Canis lupus; Lucchini et al. 2002) and brown bears (Ursus arctos) in the Italian Alps (De Barba et al. 2010), and black bears (Ursus americanus luteolus) in the southeastern United States (Triant et al. 2004).
As with telemetry, long-distance movements provide a challenge for NGS monitoring as well. With NGS, it is only possible to detect animals where surveys are conducted. Without telemetry or other supplementary data to inform NGS survey efforts, it is easy to miss isolated pockets of individuals that have dispersed far from the core study area. Scat-detecting dogs (Wasser et al. 2004) or aerial surveys (J. L. Rachlow and J. H. Witham, University of Idaho, Moscow, unpublished data) can be used to improve detection in these cases, and are options we plan to explore in the future.
Local climate conditions can impose limitations on NGS for monitoring cryptic species in 2 ways: limiting sample detection (Halfpenny et al. 1995, Sanchez et al. 2009), and influencing DNA degradation rates. Heat and humidity can accelerate DNA degradation relative to samples deposited in cold and dry conditions (Lucchini et al. 2002, Piggott 2004, Murphy et al. 2007, DeMay et al. 2013). In our study, fecal sampling was dependent on snow. Tracks, fecal pellets, and burrow activity detected on fresh snow guaranteed that the activity was recent, rather than weeks to months old. Additionally, pellets deposited on snow were kept cold and well-preserved, leading to our high success rates in the laboratory compared with samples deposited in warmer conditions (DeMay et al. 2013).

[SECTION] cost
Our cost calculations indicated that NGS was more costeffective (overall and per rabbit tracked and detected) than telemetry for our study. Costs per rabbit detected were similar, but the total cost per method and cost per rabbit tracked were approximately half as much for NGS than for telemetry. This difference is due in part to the number of rabbits tracked. Over 70% of the cost of telemetry went toward purchasing transmitters, so telemetry costs can increase or decrease markedly depending on how many animals are tracked. For NGS, > 55% of the cost went toward personnel hours for surveying the release site and collecting fecal pellets. These costs for surveying a finite area would remain essentially fixed regardless of the number of animals 'tracked' within that area. Techniques for reducing costs include reusing recovered radiotransmitters, and soliciting volunteer help during surveys.

[SECTION] juvenile pygmy rabbit dispersal and survival
Although we documented some longer distance movements, the average dispersal distance for settled rabbits was 204 m from their release site. Loss of signals from marked rabbits that moved longer distances likely biased our average downward; average natal dispersal distances for pygmy rabbits in Idaho were 1 km and 2.9 km for males and females, respectively (Estes-Zumpf and Rachlow 2009). Postrelease dispersal is not the same as natal dispersal, and it is not known how the disturbance associated with relocation might alter normal natal dispersal behavior. In one study in Eastcentral Idaho, juvenile pygmy rabbits initiated natal dispersal at 2.5-12 weeks of age, completed their dispersal movement over about 1 week, and then did not move much subsequently (Estes-Zumpf and Rachlow 2009). In our study, released rabbits ranged from approximately 4 weeks to > 12 weeks of age. If juveniles were released before the age at which they would have dispersed naturally, they could have dropped their transmitters before natal dispersal. Alternatively, rabbits released after the age at which they would have dispersed might not exhibit a marked dispersal movement.
Between summer telemetry monitoring and winter NGS sampling, rabbits continued to move. Like the telemetry data, the average distance between release sites and NGS winter sample sites was lower than natal dispersal distances documented by Estes-Zumpf and Rachlow (2009). The average NGS distance from release sites was larger than the average distance to telemetry settlements in part because our telemetry tracking was limited by transmitter loss during or prior to dispersal, and because NGS sampling occurred 4-6 months later than telemetry. Adult rabbits with established home ranges continue to shift seasonally across the landscape (Sanchez and Rachlow 2008), and we likely captured that movement of settled rabbits as well. We emphasize that these data are from 1 year of monitoring, and more in-depth analyses will follow as we apply what we have learned and continue to monitor the reintroduced population throughout its recovery.
Survival of pygmy rabbits is typically low and variable across time and space (Westra 2004, Sanchez 2008, Crawford et al. 2010, Price et al. 2010). Our NGS results indicated a minimum 37% survival rate to winter (not to be confused with annual survival). This rate is biased low because it accounts only for rabbits detected on or near the release site; we did not have the ability to detect long-distance dispersers. Results from a trial release in Idaho of captive-reared pygmy rabbit kits indicated 32% annual survival, with significant differences in survival depending on season of release (Westra 2004). Survival of wild-born kits to the next breeding season in 2 populations in East-central Idaho was 19% (n ¼ 58; Price et al. 2010). Continued monitoring of the Columbia Basin population will allow managers to evaluate the demographic and genetic responses to reintroduction, and continuously improve the recovery strategy for this endangered population.

