[SECTION] (no title)
The malaria parasites are an extremely successful and diverse group of blood parasites that infect mammals, squamate reptiles, crocodiles, turtles, and birds worldwide (Garnham 1966;Martinsen et al. 2008). Historically, these parasites have been studied by microscopy of blood films prepared from live vertebrate hosts. For elusive, rare, and sensitive vertebrate species, many of which are difficult to capture and sample in the field and for which sampling logistics including permitting prove difficult, parasite sampling has been limited. Recently, standard PCR-based methods have been used to detect parasite infection from non-traditional samples including archived blood and other tissue samples including those from extinct species or historical populations. The combination of PCR-based methods and non-invasive sampling techniques has allowed for parasite sampling from the great apes, a group under strict protection and for which we have limited information on their malaria parasite fauna. Using fecal samples collected in the field, a number of research groups have successfully genotyped malaria parasites of the genus Plasmodium from chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes), western gorillas (Gorilla gorilla), eastern gorillas (Gorilla beringei), and bonobos (Pan paniscus) (Kaiser et al. 2010;Liu et al. 2010;Prugnolle et al. 2011). Screening for malaria parasite infection from feces has also been successfully carried out in humans (Jirku et al. 2012). As birds are notoriously difficult to sample in the field, and in some cases blood sampling is not permitted or feasible, we evaluated for the first time the utility of fecal-based diagnostics for malaria parasite sampling in wild birds.
From a total of 56 wild birds caught on the grounds of the National Zoological Park in Washington, D.C. in 2010, we collected both fecal and blood samples and submerged them in lysis buffer (10 mM Tris, 10 mM EDTA, 1 mM NaCl, 5 % SDS). Blood samples were also used to prepare thin blood smears. DNA was isolated from all samples within 2 weeks using the QIAGEN Biosprint 96 System following manufacturer's guidelines. DNA was also isolated from fecal samples using the QIAmp DNA Stool Mini Kit.
All extracted samples were subjected to a nested PCR using primer sets DW2/DW4 and DW1/DW3. These primers target approximately 600 base pairs (bp) of the mitochondrial cytochrome b gene (cytb) of the parasites (Martinsen et al. 2006). In case of DNA degradation in the fecal samples, we also attempted to amplify parasite DNA from the fecal samples using primers PrCy1F and PrCy1R, which target a smaller (125 bp) cytb gene fragment (PrCy1F: GCTTTAAAAATACCCTTCTATCCAA; PrCy1R: GCATTATCTGGATGTGATAATGGTA). Both of these primer sets have proven successful in the amplification of a diversity of avian malaria parasites including those from museum specimens (Martinsen et al. 2008;Fleischer et al. unpubl.). To ensure successful isolation of DNA from the fecal samples, we attempted host DNA amplification from a random subset (N = 15) of the samples using primers Cytb2 and CytbS2H, which amplify 121 bp of the cytb gene from a wide range of birds (Fleischer et al. 2006). For both extraction and PCR protocols we used negative controls. PCR products were visualized by gel electrophoresis, purified using ExoSAP-IT, and sequenced on an ABI 3100 Sequencer. Using SEQUENCHER version 5.0, sequences were edited and aligned.
By nested PCR of blood samples from 56 birds of 14 species (Table 1), we found 35 birds to be positive for malaria parasite infection (prevalence of 63 %). Using the same nested PCR protocol for the fecal samples, no samples were found to be positive. Using a second PCR protocol on the extracted fecal samples, one that targets a smaller (125 bp) fragment of parasite DNA, we also found no positive infections. All negative controls were negative.
From the positive infections, we documented a diversity of malaria parasites of the genera Plasmodium and Parahaemoproteus. Twenty birds were infected by parasites of the genus Plasmodium and 15 by parasites of the genus Parahaemproteus. All positive infections were confirmed by light microscopy of blood smears. We successfully amplified and sequenced bird DNA from fecal samples isolated by both extraction procedures indicating successful DNA isolation from fecal material.
Unlike previous studies in apes and humans that find feces suitable for malaria parasite screening by standard PCR methods, we found this not to be the case in birds (Kaiser et al. 2010;Liu et al. 2010). We were unable to amplify both medium (600 bp) and short (125 bp) fragments of malaria parasite DNA from the feces of infected birds. This holds true for a diversity of malaria parasites of two genera (Plasmodium and Parahaemoproteus). Our inability to successfully amplify parasite DNA from bird feces may be due to differences in the composition of bird feces versus mammal feces, including the numerous compounds capable of degrading DNA and inhibiting enzymatic reactions, or the differential inclusion of erythrocyte remnants in avian versus mammalian feces. Further studies with captive birds are needed to determine if detectable amounts of parasite DNA are not shed into bird feces or if the parasite DNA is degraded in some way. Our results indicate that sampling of blood and/or other tissues is still necessary to properly diagnose malaria parasite infection in wild bird populations.

