[SECTION] 2007
). Yet specific identification is a crucial aspect when determining the particular role (e.g. redundancy vs. complementarity) of different frugivore species in the seed dispersal services provided by the whole disperser assemblage (Jordano et al. 2007;Gonz alez-Varo, L opez-Bao & Guiti an 2013). This information is essential for understanding the role of multiple mutualists in plant regeneration (Schupp, Jordano & G omez 2010), ecosystem functioning (Lundberg & Moberg 2003) and, ultimately, biodiversity conservation (Trakhtenbrot et al. 2005;Montoya et al. 2008).
Developing non-invasive methods that allow for robust identification of the frugivore species contributing dispersed seeds collected in the field would open new research avenues for frugivory and seed dispersal studies, thereby allowing the link between the removal/departure (frugivory) and arrival (seed deposition) stages of animal-mediated dispersal to be made (Schupp, Jordano & G omez 2010;Côrtes & Uriarte 2013). Different frugivore species may disperse seeds of different sizes (Rey et al. 1997), and seed size has strong effects on the early stages of plant recruitment (Alc antara & Rey 2003). Concomitantly, differences in the quality for recruitment of the microsites in which different frugivore species disperse seeds can compensate for between-species variation in the magnitude of frugivory interactions (Schupp 1995). This link between frugivory and seed deposition patterns is particularly necessary considering that almost all existing knowledge of seed dispersal networks is based onand therefore biased towardsfrugivory interactions detected by observations of animal visits to fruiting plants (e.g. Schleuning et al. 2014) or faecal analyses of mist-netted birds (Jordano 1988;Heleno et al. 2013).
Here, we develop a protocol for the application of DNAbarcoding techniques for identifying frugivore species from animal matter present on the surface of dispersed seeds sampled in the field. DNA barcoding has been widely used for biodiversity and animal diet studies (reviewed in Valentini, Pompanon & Taberlet 2009). However, its application when resolving ecological problems such as the functional features of different partner species within complex interaction networks is still emerging (see Jurado-Rivera et al. 2009 for a pioneer application for host-herbivore interactions). Marrero et al. (2009) pioneered the use of amplified DNA sequences to identify two pigeon species using faeces and dispersed seeds with the aim of characterizing habitat segregation (Nogales et al. 2009). Avian DNA can be successfully extracted from the minimal amount of material that is present on the surface of regurgitated or defecated seeds. Seeds can be sampled in seed traps or directly from the ground, as is habitual in seed rain studies (Jordano et al. 2007;Garc ıa, Zamora & Amico 2010).
Avian species identification by DNA barcoding was based on a mitochondrial DNA region of the cytochrome c oxidase subunit I (COI; see Ratnasingham & Hebert 2007). In order to illustrate how DNA barcoding can be applied to unambiguously answer major questions in frugivory and seed dispersal, we conducted pilot surveys in Mediterranean woodland vegetation in SW Spain to sample bird-dispersed seeds. Then, we use our data set of 'individual seeds with DNA-identified frugivore-seed disperser' in three application examples to answer the following questions: (i) Which frugivores disperse the seeds of which plant species? (ii) What is the contribution of different frugivore species to seed arrival in different microhabitats? and (iii) Do different frugivores select for different fruit/seed sizes?

[SECTION] materials and methods
Avian disperser identification was based on a 464-bp mitochondrial DNA region of the cytochrome c oxidase subunit I (COI) employing the 'Barcode Of Life Data' identification system (BOLD: http://www. boldsystems.org; Ratnasingham & Hebert 2007). BOLD accepts sequences from the 5 0 region of the COI gene and returns species-level identification whenever possible and assigns a percentage of similarity to matched sequences.
Primers already designed for degraded avian DNA did not work successfully in our avian assemblage, as we found after checking sequences reported by Lijtmaer et al. (2012) with Sequencher 4.9 (Gene Codes Corp., Ann Arbor, MI, USA) and after testing primers designed by D. Pastor-B evia et al. (unpublished data) in our samples. Indeed, Lohman, Prawiradilaga & Meier (2009) also described problems with amplifying the COI region using standard primers and recommended newly designed primers for Passeriformes. Consequently, we designed new primers (COI-fsdF: 5 0 -GCATGAGCCGGAATAGTRGG-3 0 ; COI-fsdR: 5 0 -TGTGAKAGGGCAGGTGGTTT-3 0 ) using one reference COI sequence of each of 16 avian species occurring in our study area, most of them reported as frugivorous seed dispersers (see Table S1). We acquired COI sequences from BOLD data bases by selecting individual samples that included the Iberian Peninsula as breeding and/or wintering grounds. Primers were designed by searching for lowvariability regions spanning variable regions after the sequences were aligned using Sequencher 4.9. Degeneracy was included in one base position of each primer. This pair of primers was tested on nondegraded DNA isolated from feather, blood or muscle samples of 16 selected species (see Table S1). PCR amplifications of all species yielded a 464-bp product that was sequenced and verified for its matching with COI sequences from BOLD data bases.

[SECTION] validation material
In order to verify the correct identification of bird species in defecated or regurgitated material, we tested the primers on samples of known species provenance. We collected faeces without seeds and defecated or regurgitated seeds from birds captured in mist-netting sessions carried out within a routine bird-ringing programme in southern Spain (C adiz province). Mist nets were operated in woodland habitats between November 2012 and January 2013. We collected bird droppings (i) from sterile filter paper placed within the cloth bags used to keep the birds during ringing sessions and (ii) from 1 m 9 10 m plastic mesh (<0Á5 mm pore) placed beneath the mist nets as we frequently observed fresh dropping beneath birds trapped in nets. We used sterile-disposable tweezers to pick up samples and place them in 1Á5-or 2Á0-mL sterile tubes (see Fig. S1). We obtained a total of 23 samples, 6 faeces and 17 defecated/regurgitated seeds (belonging to Pistacia lentiscus and Olea europaea), from a total of 23 individuals belonging to nine bird species (see Table 1), most of them known frugivores and legitimate seed dispersers (Herrera 1984). Additionally, we collected 17 defecated/regurgitated seeds of P. lentiscus and O. europaea beneath a roosting perch of spotless starlings (Sturnus unicolor). For validation, we checked the correspondence between the COI DNA sequence isolated from these samples and those from their known disperser species obtained in BOLD (see Table 1).

[SECTION] sample processing
In the initial step of extraction, three methods for recovering avian DNA from the surface of the defecated/regurgitated seeds and faeces were evaluated and compared: 'method 1': the seed was wrapped with filter paper following Marrero et al. (2009); 'method 2': the seed surface was rubbed with a sterile cotton swab (Ram on-Laca & Gleeson 2014) soaked in phosphate buffer; and 'method 3': the seed was directly incubated in extraction buffer with rotation but no vortexing. Two DNA extraction protocols were tested on validation samples: 'protocol 1', a GuSCN/silica protocol for ancient DNA modified from H€ oss & P€ a€ abo (1993) and Rohland, Siedel & Hofreiter (2010) and 'protocol 2', the GuSCN/silica protocol of Marrero et al. (2009), originally used for regurgitated seeds and faeces from Canary Islands pigeons. Both protocols are based on GuSCN and silica but differ in extraction buffers, incubation times, amount of silica added and the silica pellet washing (see details in Table S2).

[SECTION] s a m p l i n g b i r d -d i s p e r s e d s e e d s i n t h e f i e l d
We sampled bird-dispersed seeds in the field in order to apply the method and identify their disperser species. Sampling was carried out between 29 October 2013 and 30 January 2014 in Garrapilos, a Mediterranean lowland forest fragment (50 m a.s.l., c. 120 ha) located in C adiz province, southern Spain (36°397 0 N, 5°56 0 8W). Vegetation consists of large holm-(Quercus ilex subsp. ballota) and cork-(Q. suber) oaks, and an understorey dominated by treelets and shrubs, among which Quercus coccifera (Fagaceae), Pistacia lentiscus (Anacardiaceae), Olea europaea var. sylvestris (Oleaceae), Rhamnus alaternus (Rhamnaceae) and Crataegus monogyna (Rosaceae) are the dominant species.
We sampled bird-dispersed seeds in 40 seed traps with locations randomly stratified across three microhabitat types: 14 beneath oaks, 14 beneath treelets/shrubs bearing fleshy fruits (Pistacia female plants, Olea and Crataegus) and 12 beneath treelets/shrubs not bearing fleshy fruits (Pistacia male plants, Q. coccifera and R. alaternus, the latter a summer-ripening species). Seed traps consisted of plastic trays (40 cm 9 55 cm, 8 cm height) with small holes (1 mm diameter) to allow the drainage of rainwater and covered with wire mesh (1 cm light) to prevent post-dispersal seed predation by vertebrates. Additionally, we set up six fixed transects (23-to 45-m long and 1-m wide) in open ground areas where bird-mediated seed rain is less likely (Jordano & Schupp 2000) and post-dispersal seed predation is typically low due the lack of shelters for rodents (Fedriani & Manzaneda 2005). Finally, we also sampled bird-dispersed seeds through direct searches in order to increase sample sizes in under-sampled microhabitats. Seed traps and fixed transects were set up on 29 October 2013 and were monitored weekly or biweekly until 30 January 2014. The sampling period (November-January) spanned the peak abundances of different fleshyfruited species in Mediterranean woodlands (Jordano 1988).
We sampled each bird-dispersed seed (or individual faeces containing seeds) putting it with a minimum of handling into a 1Á5-or 2Á0-mL sterile tube (depending upon seed size; see Fig. S1) with the aid of the tube cap; alternatively, each seed can be collected with sterile, disposable tweezers. Tubes were labelled with information regarding seed identity, microhabitat identity and trap/transect code and then stored in a freezer at À20°C until DNA extraction.

[SECTION] d n a i s o l a t i o n , a m p l i f i c a t i o n a n d s e q u e n c i n g
DNA extractions were performed in a laboratory dedicated to low DNA concentration procedures, and negative controls were included in each extraction to check for contamination. We followed 'method 3' (i.e. seed incubation in extraction buffer) combined with 'protocol 1' (i.e. a GuSCN/silica protocol for ancient DNA; modified from H€ oss & P€ a€ abo 1993 and Rohland, Siedel & Hofreiter 2010), which gave higher yields of PCR amplifications (see Results; Table S3). Nevertheless, a sterile swab soaked in phosphate buffer ('method 2') was used when the seed surface had an excess of faecal material and/or pulp residues.
A volume of 450 or 500 lL of extraction buffer (Longmire, Maltbie & Baker 1997) (0Á1 M Tris-HCl pH 8Á0, 0Á1 M EDTA pH 8Á0, 0Á01 M NaCl, 0Á5% SDS and 0Á25 mg mL À1 Proteinase K) was added to the 1Á5-or 2Á0-mL tubes, respectively, containing seeds or swabs, and incubated in rotation at 50°C for 2Á5 h. Supernatant (c. 400-450 lL) was transferred to a new 2Á0-mL tube; then, 1Á4 mL of binding buffer (5 M GuSCN, 0Á1 M Tris-HCl pH 6Á4, 0Á02 M EDTA pH 8Á0 and 1Á3% Triton X-100) and 120 lL of silica suspension were added, and the mix was incubated in rotation at room temperature for 2Á5 h in the dark. This step allows the binding of DNA to silica particles in the presence of high salt concentration. After centrifugation (2 min at 17000 g), the supernatant was discarded, and the silica pellet was resuspended in 400 lL of binding buffer and transferred to columns (MoBiTec, Germany, product # M1002S) with a glass microfiber filter (Whatman Grade GF/B 1Á0 lm) on the top of the 10-lm column filter. After centrifugation (1 min at 17 950 g), silica particles retained in the column were washed at least twice using 450 lL of washing buffer PCR amplifications were performed by increasing the concentration of primers and Taq to overcome the expected low avian DNA amount in samples and by increasing the concentration of bovine serum albumin (BSA) to overcome the possible PCR inhibitors. The final 30-lL volume of the PCR cocktail contained 3Á0 lL (1 9 ) buffer (67 mM Tris-HCL pH 8Á8, 16 mM (NH 4 ) 2 SO 4 , 10 mM KCl, 0Á01% stabilizer), 1Á2 lL (2Á0 mM) MgCl 2 , 0Á75 lL (0Á5 mg mL À1 ) BSA (Roche Diagnostics, Barcelona, Spain), 0Á3 lL (0Á25 mM) dNTP, 1Á8 lL (0Á60 lM) 9 2 primers (COI-fsdF and COI-fsdR; see above), 0Á2 lL (1Á0 U) Taq DNA polymerase (Bioline, London, UK), 12Á95 lL ultrapure water and 8 lL of the DNA extract (mean AE SD: 8Á4 AE 5Á9 ng lL À1 of total DNA, n = 39 samples; quantified with NanoDrop â ND-1000 Spectrophotometer, NanoDrop Technologies Inc., Wilmington, DE, USA). Reactions were undertaken in a Bio-Rad DNA Engine â Peltier Thermal Cycler with an initial 4 min of denaturation at 94°C; 42 cycles at 94°C for 45 s, annealing at 54°C for 45 s and extension at 72°C for 45 s; and final extension of 6 min at 72°C. After verifying successful amplification by agarose gel electrophoresis, excess primers and dNTPs were removed using enzymatic reaction of Antarctic phosphatase buffer, Antarctic phosphatase and Escherichia coli exonuclease I (all New England Biolabs, Hitchin, UK). We only sequenced one strand (forward primer) of the amplified COI fragments because the electrophoretic patterns were clear (trimming initial 5 0 region for low quality) and resulting sequences (390-to 420-bp length; average quality >90% in Sequencher) allowed successful discrimination between species (see Results). Sequencing reaction was carried out using the BigDye â Terminator v1.1 cycle sequencing kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions, and labelled fragments were cleaned on SephadexTM G-50 (GE Healthcare, Little Chalfont, UK) plates before electrophoresis in an ABI 3130xl Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems). DNA fragments were aligned and edited using Sequencher 4.9, and the obtained sequences were identified using the BOLD identification system (http://www.boldsystems.org/index.php/IDS_OpenIdEngine).

[SECTION] d a t a a n a l y s e s : a p p l i c a t i o n e x a m p l e s
We used our data set consisting of 'individual seeds whose disperser species was DNA-identified' to illustrate how DNA-barcoding techniques can be applied to unambiguously answer major questions in frugivory and animal-mediated seed dispersal.
Example 1. Which frugivores disperse the seeds of which plant species?
We used our data set to draw a weighted interaction network between frugivorous seed dispersers and fruiting plants which represents the identity and strength of interactions between partner species (i.e. the importance of fruit species for birds and the quantity of dispersal services provided by birds for plants). We used the R package 'bipartite' version 2.03 (Dormann, Fr€ und & Gruber 2014) to plot this network.
Example 2. What is the contribution of different frugivore species to seed arrival in different microhabitats?
We used data from the two dominant fleshy-fruited species in the study site (O. europaea and P. lentiscus) to explore the patterns of seed deposition by different frugivore species over different microhabitats. We used seeds sampled in seed traps and fixed transects to calculate the magnitude of seed rain (seeds m À2 ) per microhabitat but used all sampled seeds, including those collected during direct searches, to quantify the relative contribution (%) of each frugivore species to the seed rain in each microhabitat type (see Jordano & Schupp 2000).
Example 3. Do different frugivores select for different fruit/ seed sizes?
We used data from wild olive (O. europaea)-dispersed seeds to test whether different frugivore species select different fruit sizes. We chose the wild olive because its fruits are large enough to prevent fruit swallowing by small bird species (Rey et al. 1997). The gape width of local frugivorous birds ranges between 7Á1 mm (Sylvia melanocephala) and 13Á7 mm (Turdus philomelos) (Rey et al. 1997), whereas wild olive fruits in the study site ranged between 6Á3 and 13Á7 mm in diameter and 9Á1 and 20Á9 mm in length (spherical Pistacia fruits are typically <6 mm diameter). Seed dry weight is highly correlated with the weight, length and diameter of fresh wild olive fruits (r 2 = 0Á83-0Á90; P < 0Á001, n = 60). Thus, once Olea (defleshed) seeds were processed for DNAbarcoding analysis and their avian-frugivore species was identified, we measured their dry weight to test for differences between frugivore species in fruit size consumption.

[SECTION] s a m p l e p r o c e s s i n g a n d v a l i d a t i o n
Validation tests were carried out on faeces and defecated/ regurgitated seeds whose source frugivore species was known in advance. For recovering avian DNA from the surface of the dispersed seeds, 'method 3' (i.e. direct incubation of seeds in extraction buffer) resulted in satisfactory yields of PCR products for sequencing. Moreover, this was practical and feasible as all our seed species fitted into the 1Á5-to 2Á0-mL tubes (see Fig. S1). It also was very efficient as most seed samples had little avian-originated material (see Fig. S2). Wrapping seeds in filter paper ('method 1') was not suitable for Pistacia lentiscus seeds due to their small size (see Fig. S1), yielding insufficient PCR amplifications. The sterile swab ('method 2') was more efficient for recovering avian-originated material (DNA) from the seed surface but required more manipulation of the seeds that, in some cases, entailed the partial loss of material. However, it produced better results when the seed surface had an excess of faecal material and/or pulp remains, probably because avian-originated DNA is present on the external layers (those recovered with the swab) of the dispersed seeds.
'Protocol 1', which included different buffers for sample digestion and DNA binding steps, and columns for washing and elution steps, resulted in significantly higher (>2-fold) yields of PCR amplifications than 'protocol 2' (Mann-Whitney U-test: Z = 3Á5, P < 0Á001; Table S3). The resulting yields were also more consistent across individual samples (Table S3). The longer incubation times (in both digestion and DNA binding steps) probably improve the breakage of intact tissue structure and DNA binding to silica. Moreover, columns allow a more efficient washing for removing inhibitors and the elution steps.
The expected 464-bp PCR product was amplified, and all processed samples (faeces and defecated/regurgitated seeds whose source species were known in advance) were successfully validated (Table 1). After scoring, we obtained a 390-to 420bp sequence length owing to the fact that templates were sequenced on one strand (forward primer). Species identification was correct in all cases based on a 99Á4-100% of sequence similarity (see results in Table 1). With the exception of Sturnus unicolor (see Table 1), the second species ranked by BOLD had a similarity of 89-94% with the scored sequences.

[SECTION] d i s p e r s e r i d e n t i f i c a t i o n i n b i r d -d i s p e r s e d s e e d s
During the field-sampling operation, we collected a total of 221 seeds belonging to four fleshy-fruited species: 111 of Pistacia lentiscus, 105 of Olea europaea, four of Crataegus monogyna and one of Myrtus communis (Fig. S2). Five frugivorous bird species were successfully identified through DNA barcoding as the dispersers of those seeds (Fig. 1): blackcap (Sylvia atricapilla, n = 81), European robin (Erithacus rubecula, n = 47), song thrush (Turdus philomelos, n = 45), Sardinian warbler (Sylvia melanocephala, n = 23) and woodpigeon (Columba palumbus, n = 2). The disperser species was successfully identified in 90% (197) of the samples (based on a similarity threshold > 99%, i.e. 99Á4-100%). Most unsuccessful identifications were due to no DNA amplification (2Á8% of samples) or to the presence of unspecific amplifications from exogenous DNA (i.e. non-avian DNA; 7Á2% of samples).
Despite great differences in size, shape and coat texture (Fig. S1), the percentage of successful disperser identification was very similar for the two main seed species in the data set, P. lentiscus (89%; 99 seeds) and O. europaea (90%; 94 seeds). The disperser species was also identified for the four C. monogyna seeds and the single M. communis seed.
Identification success was higher for seeds sampled in November (97%) and December (95%), months dominated by non-rainy days, than for those sampled in January (81%), when rainy days prevailed and seeds in traps were frequently damp. Identification success was in general high and similar for seeds sampled in different microhabitats (Table S4), with all values between 81% and 100%, except for O. europaea seeds sampled beneath female Pistacia shrubs, with only 63% of seed successfully identified. This low value is likely to be related to the fact that most seeds collected in that microhabitat (9 out of 11) came from direct searches and the time period elapsed since deposition by birds was unknown.
Which frugivores disperse the seeds of which plant species?
Using seeds whose disperser was successfully DNA-identified (n = 198), we recorded a total of 11 (out of 20 possible) distinct 'frugivory-seed dispersal' interactions between species of fleshy-fruited plants and frugivorous birds (Fig. 1). The weighted interaction network shows how different bird species consume the fruits and disperse the seeds of plant species at different frequencies and how they vary in their role as seed dispersers (Fig. 1). It also illustrates how the fruit species varied in their contribution to the frugivorous diet of each bird species. For example, although both S. atricapilla and S. melanocephala ate the fruits and dispersed the seeds of the same species (O. europaea and P. lentiscus), S. atricapilla relied on these two plants more evenly than S. melanocephala. In turn, while most of the frugivorous diet of S. melanocephala consisted of P. lentiscus fruits (96%), the dispersal services of P. lentiscus only depended partially on this bird (22%). As well, despite being consumed by all five bird species, just two (T. philomelos and S. atricapilla) accounted for 96% of seed dispersal services (90 out of 94 seeds) in O. europaea, the contribution of the other three species being marginal (1-2% each; Fig. 1).
What is the contribution of different frugivore species to seed arrival in different microhabitats?
The seed dispersal services provided by the different bird species to the two dominant fruiting plants (O. europaea and P. lentiscus) were not evenly distributed over the different microhabitats (Fig. 2). The magnitude of bird-mediated seed rain varied between the sampled microhabitats by nearly two orders of magnitude, ranging in O. europaea from a mean of 0Á06 seeds m À2 in open areas to 13Á6 seeds m À2 beneath Olea plants, and in P. lentiscus from zero seeds m À2 in open areas to 21Á8 seeds m À2 beneath female Pistacia plants (Fig. 2). The

[SECTION] myrtus communis
Fig. 1. Empirical interaction network of avian frugivores and fleshy-fruited plants determined by DNA-barcoding identification of frugivore species in dispersed seeds. Seeds were sampled from seed traps, transects and intensive searches, while avian DNA was extracted from remains present on the surface of dispersed seeds. Horizontal width of the nodes is proportional to the frequency of each species sampled in each trophic level. Horizontal width of the links between species is proportional to the frequency of seeds assigned to each avian-frugivore species.
relative contribution of each disperser species to seed rain in each microhabitat varied enormously, ranging from 0% (i.e. no contribution) to 67% in P. lentiscus dispersed by E. rubecula under Quercus trees and to 82% in O. europaea dispersed by S. atricapilla beneath Rhamnus and Q. coccifera plants (see Fig. 2). Relative contributions were calculated from a mean AE sd of 12Á9 AE 5Á5 (range 5-23) 'identified' seeds per microhabitat (see Fig. 2). Such sample sizes enabled us to detect that, for example, the relative contribution of T. philomelos to the seed rain of O. europaea beneath Olea plants (17%, CI 95% = 1-34%, n = 23) was significantly lower than beneath Crataegus plants (73%, CI 95% = 41-100%, n = 11). However, the reduced sample sizes in other microhabitats (n ≤ 10) did not allow the detection of significant differences (i.e. CI 95% slightly overlapped). Combining (mean) seed rain per microhabitat and the relative contribution of each disperser species in that microhabitat allowed us to calculate the magnitude of seed rain in each microhabitat per disperser species. For example, due to important differences in the magnitude of seed rain, the mean density of Olea seeds dispersed by song thrushes beneath Crataegus plants (0Á83 seeds m À2 ) was lower than beneath Rhamnus plants (1Á24 seeds m À2 ), despite a much larger relative contribution under the former plant species (73% vs. 18%, respectively).

[SECTION] do different frugivores select for different fruit/seed sizes?
As reported above, most Olea seeds whose avian disperser was successfully barcoded (96%; 90 out of 94) were dispersed by song thrushes (T. philomelos) and blackcaps (S. atricapilla), the sample size in the other three disperser species being too small to test fruit size selection (Fig. 1). Song thrushes and blackcaps significantly differed in the seed sizes they dispersed (see Fig. 3) and thus in the fruit sizes they consumed. Fruits consumed by song thrushes and blackcaps had, respectively, mean diameters of 8Á14 and 7Á80 mm, mean lengths of 11Á88 and 11Á27 mm and mean weights of 0Á486 and 0Á398 g, as estimated from linear regressions on dry seed weight (r 2 = 0Á83-0Á90; P < 0Á001, n = 60).
====================================================================================================
FILE: Conflicting management policies for the Arabian wolf Canis lupus arabs in the Negev Desert is this j.grobid.tei (1).xml
====================================================================================================

[SECTION] study area
The central and southern Negev is a rocky desert, a mixture of mountains, washes, and depressions. The 160 km Arava Valley, an elongated depression of the Rift Valley, borders the Negev in the east. Elevation in the mountainous regions is 400-1,000 m, falling to 50-150 m at the bottom of the Rift. The climate is hot and arid, with an annual rainfall of 50-100 mm, falling during the winter months of November-March (Evenari et al., 1982). There are two cities, Eilat (population 50,000) at the northern tip of the Red Sea, and Mitzpe Ramon (population 6,000) in the Negev highlands. All other settlements are agricultural communities (10 in the Eilat district and eight in the South district), mostly in the Rift Valley.

[SECTION] sample collection
To sample wolf scats equally over the central and southern Negev Desert we established a grid of 12 feeding sites c. 20 km apart. Five feeding sites were established in the Eilat district (sampling an area of c. 2,129 km 2 ) and seven in the South district (sampling an area of c. 2,910 km 2 ; Fig. 1). In setting out this grid of feeding sites we also considered vehicle accessibility and other entry restrictions. Mean home range size of Arabian wolves in the Negev Desert is 34.6 ± SD 19.5 km 2 and mean daily travel distance is 13.7 ± SD 6.7 km (maximum recorded distance travelled in a day is 42 km; Hefner & Geffen, 1999). Considering this mean daily travel distance all wolves in this area could probably reach at least one of the feeding sites on a daily basis. Once a month INPA rangers placed a cow calf carcass at each feeding site and scanned the site for scats 1 week later. Each calf carcass was secured to prevent removal by predators. The meat provided at each feeding site was insufficient to support local wolves but provided an incentive for resident wolves to inspect the site on a regular basis and defecate nearby. Because it is difficult to find wolf scats by random searches, except around garbage dumps, this system facilitated the sampling of individuals that are not associated with human habitation on a regular basis. Scats found on the routes leading to the feeding sites were also collected. Each scat was placed in a paper bag and the location and date of collection recorded. In this hot, arid environment, scats become dry a few hours after defecation and storage in paper bags keeps them dry and protected from condensation.

[SECTION] genetic analysis
We extracted DNA from faecal samples using the protocol in Reed et al. (1997). Diagnostic mtDNA segments were used to confirm wolf DNA. We used 10 polymorphic wolf microsatellites to identify individuals. Details of the molecular procedures are outlined in Supplementary Information 1.
We used two population genetic approaches to examine whether a spatial correspondence exists between genetic and spatial grouping (i.e. INPA districts) of wolves. Details of the relatedness network analysis are provided in Supplementary Information 1.

[SECTION] bayesian clustering
To assign individuals to populations we used STRUCTURE 2.3.1 (Pritchard et al., 2000), which uses multi-locus genotypes (X) to infer population structure. The Bayesian model assumes K populations that have different allele frequencies within a set of independent loci. We applied the admixture ancestry model once with the independent allele frequency model and once with the correlated model. The number of populations (K) was modified from 1 to 10. For each value of K 10 independent simulations were run for each of the two allele frequency models. Each simulation had a burn-in period of 500,000 iterations followed by a sampling of 500,000 iterations. The likelihood of K (i.e. Ln Pr(X|K)) and ΔK (Evanno et al., 2005) were used to infer the more likely number of populations. This algorithm also calculates a membership coefficient (Q) for each individual in each population. We used the highest Q value to assign each individual to a population.

[SECTION] population size estimation
We used three different approaches to estimate the wolf population size in the Negev: rarefaction curves, capturemark-recapture, and a simple urn model called Capwire.
Rarefaction curve In this technique the data are plotted as the number of unique multi-locus genotypes (i.e. individuals) as a function of sample size (number of scats analysed) and then fitted to a curve. The asymptote of the curve provides an estimate of the population size. Three fitting equations have been employed in similar previous studies: y 5 ax/(b+x) (Kohn et al., 1999), y 5 a(1-e -bx ) (Eggert et al., 2003) and y 5 a-a(1-1/a) x , which was developed by D. Chessel (Frantz & Roper, 2006). In all equations a is the asymptote, b determines the rate of decrease of the slope, x is the number of scats sampled, and y is the number of unique genotypes. We used GIMLET to generate rarefaction curves (Valiere, 2002). Because the order in which DNA samples are added has an influence on the shape of the curve ( Kohn et al., 1999) we used R 2.10.1 (Ihaka & Gentleman, 1996) to randomize (1,000 iterations) the order of the DNA samples and projected the asymptote for each of these randomizations using each of the three equations. The median of all 1,000 iterations of the asymptote was taken as an estimate of the population size (Frantz & Roper, 2006).
The 95% confidence interval (CI) corresponds to the 0.025 and 0.975 percentiles.
Capture-mark-recapture (CMR) model The study design (i.e. sampling at the feeding stations at monthly intervals) allowed us to easily adapt the genetic data to the CMR model. Identical multi-locus genotypes were considered to originate from the same individual and a history of captures and recaptures was assembled for each genotype. We divided the study period into 20 monthly sampling sessions.
If the same genotype was sampled more than once in the same month we considered only one capture for that month.
Analysis was performed with an open population model, using the POPAN module in MARK (White & Burnham, 1999). We used a set of four possible models: fully time dependent ( pt,φt,bt) where p represents the probability of capture, φ represents the probability of an animal surviving between occasions and b is probability of entrance; constant catchability ( p•,φt,bt); constant survival rate ( pt,φ•,bt); and constant catchability and survival rate ( p•,φ•,bt). We performed a goodness-of-fit using the RELEASE suite (Cooch & White 2007) to confirm that the most general sub-model adequately fitted the data. MARK uses AIC c (Akaike's information criterion corrected for small sample size) for model selection.
Capture with replacement In non-invasive sampling individuals may be 'captured' several times within one sampling session. When using classical CMR models such multiple captures must be pooled, as an animal should not be captured more than once in one session. This potentially wastes data. Capwire (Miller et al., 2005) uses a method developed to accommodate this type of data and is based on a simple urn model. There are two capture models: the even capture probability model (ECM) in which every individual is equally likely to be captured in each sampling session with a probability of 1/population size, and the two innate rates model (TIRM), which is more realistic, in which there are two types of individuals with different probabilities of capture. The software performs a likelihood-ratio test to determine which model is more suitable for the given data.

[SECTION] sample collection and microsatellite genotype
Over a period of 20 months from May 2007 to December 2008 a total of 334 faecal samples were collected and an additional three tissue samples were taken from wolves that had been shot by INPA rangers. Most scats (82%) were collected after the wolf control programme was terminated. Mitochondrial DNA for species identification was successfully amplified in 230 (69%) of the faecal samples, of which 95 were identified as wolf DNA, 93 were of red foxes Vulpes vulpes, 12 of dogs Canis lupus familiaris, nine of golden jackals Canis aureus and two of striped hyaenas Hyaena hyaena. In 5% of the samples that were identified, mtDNA of the prey (Ovis aries, Capra hircus, Bos taurus) rather than the predator was amplified.
Of the 98 wolf DNA samples (i.e. 95 faecal samples plus three tissue samples) we obtained a complete or nearly complete multi-locus genotype for 76 samples. The mean rate of allelic dropout was 0.068 and mean rate of false alleles was 0.113 for all replicates at all microsatellite loci. The probability of two individuals possessing identical genotypes (PI) was 1.40 × 10 -10 for a randomly mated population and 1.635 × 10 -4 for siblings. Error rates and PI values of each locus were calculated using GIMLET (Table 1, Supplementary Information 1). We identified 52 unique haplotypes of which 12 were sampled more than once, with a mean of 1.46 samples per individual. The maximum resample rate was six (n52).

[SECTION] population structure
We used the Bayesian model in the programme STRUCTURE. The highest Ln Pr(X|K ) and ΔK were observed for K53, indicating three genetic subpopulations (Figs 2 & 3a). This result was consistent for both correlated and independent allele frequency models. Most sampled individuals were easily assigned to a cluster as their estimated membership coefficient (Q) was . 0.7 for a specific population. However, three individuals (15, 7, and 11) could not be assigned because their Q values were < 0.7 (Fig. 3a).
The distribution of two of the genetic populations (C3 and C1; Fig. 3b) did not show any clear spatial separation between INPA districts. In Eilat district six individuals were of the C1 cluster and 10 of the C3 cluster, and in the South district 10 individuals were of the C1 cluster and eight of the C3 cluster (Fig. 3b). However, a third population (C2; Fig. 3b) had most individuals (n 5 13) in the South district and only one individual in the Eilat district. Thus, the division between districts was significantly dependent on genetic clustering (χ 2 2 5 8.114, P 5 0.0172) because of the uneven distribution of the C2 cluster members between districts (Fig. 3b).

[SECTION] population size estimation
The Kohn rarefaction equation gave the highest population estimate, of 176.8 wolves (95% CI 120.8-491.4), followed by that of Eggert with an estimate of 102.1 (95% CI 74.4-256.2), and Chessel with the lowest estimate of 86.2 wolves (95% CI 72.1-105.3; Table 2). The TIRM model of Capwire (L(TIRM) -L(ECM)522.48) gave an estimate of 142 wolves (95% CI 89-179). For the CMR model the goodness-of-fit test confirmed that the most general sub-model adequately fitted the data (χ 2 11 5 3.447, P 5 0.983). The constant catchability and constant survival rate model ranked highest by AICc and gave an estimate of 173.4 wolves (95% CI 85.6-261.1; Table 3).
A separate population estimation for each district showed that although the number of wolves in the Eilat district was considerably lower than in the South district, the density of wolves was similar in both districts based on the rarefaction estimates but higher in the South district based on the CMR and Capwire estimates (Table 2). CMR models showed that the lowest AIC c value was obtained by the constant catchability model for the South district and the constant catchability and survival rate model for the Eilat district (Table 3).

