[SECTION] 590
JOURNAL OF MAMMALOGY polluted the environment, reducing biodiversity throughout the country (Liu et al. 2003;Liu and Diamond 2005). For instance, according to Jiang et al. (2015), 178 of 673 species of mammals (~26%) are currently threatened in China. To maintain mammal biodiversity in China, natural resource managers must develop wildlife conservation programs and policy based on reliable information about the distribution and abundance of species.
Ecological monitoring is an important component of wildlife conservation (Nichols and Williams 2006). Other than giant pandas (Ailuropoda melanoleuca), few mammal species, including widely distributed small-bodied mammalian carnivores, have been monitored in China (Li et al. 2010). Some of the mammal monitoring programs that do exist (e.g., the national giant panda survey), however, use outdated sampling protocols (State Forestry Administration 2006;Garshelis et al. 2008), resulting in the development of conservation programs based on equivocal information. Similar to many developing regions of the world, it is essential to develop standardized sampling protocols for mammals of concern in China that are efficient, cost-effective, and current.
Many researchers use noninvasive genetic methods to sample rare and elusive mammals (Long et al. 2008). Unlike traditional sampling that relies on radiotracking, which is often expensive, time-consuming, and intrusive (because it requires capture and handling), noninvasive genetic sampling methods are affordable, efficient, and do not require handling the target animals (Weaver et al. 2005;Kelly et al. 2012). Moreover, genetic sampling can yield relatively large samples for rare or elusive mammal populations (Kelly et al. 2012).
Researchers often target the fur of mammals when conducting studies that rely on noninvasive genetic sampling (Kendall and McKelvey 2008). Hairs collected from hair-snaring devices provide investigators physical evidence of species presence, which is not generally subject to observer bias. In particular, researchers identify species by examining the morphological structure of hair (Lobert et al. 2001) or using genetic methods (Foran et al. 1997). Hair follicles can provide high quality DNA, especially when samples are large (e.g., > 10 hairs- Kelly et al. 2012;O'Mahony et al. 2015). Investigators commonly use microsatellite genotypes derived from DNA in hair follicles to estimate population abundance and density and to evaluate the growth rates, genetic diversity, gene flow, or social structure of populations (Waits and Paetkau 2005). Hair shafts are also useful to researchers as they contain other biochemical markers such as stable isotopes. Such ecological tracers are commonly used to estimate the proportional contributions of important resources to the diets of mammals (Phillips 2001;Hopkins and Ferguson 2012;Parnell et al. 2013;Phillips et al. 2014).
Hair collection methods are divided into baited and passive methods (Kendall and McKelvey 2008). Baited methods use scent lure and/or bait to attract animals to the hair-snaring devices (e.g., hair corrals, rub stations, lure sticks or posts, and cubbies), whereas passive methods include objects animals rub on instinctually (e.g., rub trees) or accidently (e.g., hairsnares that target travel routes- Kendall and McKelvey 2008).
Previous studies have evaluated the effectiveness of both baited (Weaver et al. 2005;Zielinski et al. 2006;Castro-Arellano et al. 2008;Pauli et al. 2008;Burki et al. 2010;Heurich et al. 2012) and passive methods (Clevenger and Sawaya 2010;Karamanlidis et al. 2010) for collecting hair from free-ranging mammalian carnivores. McDaniel et al. (2000) and Monterroso et al. (2011) compared the attractiveness of different scent lures for hair-snaring, while other studies compared genetic sampling methods to other noninvasive techniques (e.g., remote cameras, detection dogs, snow tracking) to determine the most appropriate method to use in future studies (Harrison 2006;Long et al. 2007;Ruell and Crooks 2007;Sawaya et al. 2011;Johnson et al. 2013).
Although several noninvasive genetic studies have used fecal material to study wildlife in China (Zhang et al. 2008;Zhang et al. 2009;Hu et al. 2010;Yang and Jiang 2011;Chang et al. 2014), no study to our knowledge has evaluated the relative success of different genetic sampling methods in China. For this study, we recorded the behavior of masked palm civets (Paguma larvata) and Siberian weasels (Mustela sibirica) to determine their relative preference for using different hair-snaring devices (lure sticks with barbed wire or glue sheets, and 1-and 2-door triangular ground cubbies) and evaluated the effectiveness of each device at collecting their hair in Laohegou Nature Reserve, Sichuan Province, China (Fig. 1). Although we recognized that remote cameras were effective at detecting a wide diversity of wildlife in our study area and other locations in Southwest China, including civets and weasels (Li et al. 2012), we focused our research efforts on testing potential devices used for genetic sampling of civets and weasels, as these species do not seem to have unique stripe patterns or spots that can be easily identified from photographs (O' Connell et al. 2011). We evaluated lure sticks and ground cubbies because they collected guard hair from civets and weasels in our study area (J. B. Hopkins, pers. obs.; Fig. 1) and from fishers (Martes pennanti; which have a similar body size as civets) in North America (Schwartz et al. 2006), respectively. We were interested in using lure sticks for future genetic sampling because, in addition to collecting hair for our target animals, giant pandas occasionally destroy ground cubbies (Fig. 2). The goal of our study was to determine the genetic sampling method(s) we should use in the future to estimate the occupancy rates, abundances, and diets (via stable isotopes from hair) of masked palm civets and Siberian weasels in Southwest China.

[SECTION] materials and methods
Study area.-Laohegou (Old Creek Valley) Nature Reserve (110 km 2 ; 32°30′N, 104°42′E) is located in the Minshan Mountains of Sichuan Province, China (Fig. 1). From 1975 to 1998, Laohegou was primarily used for harvesting timber by the local government. Following the national logging ban in 1998, Laohegou was converted to protected land under the auspices of the National Forest Protection Program (Li et al. 2012). In 2012, The Nature Conservancy China and the Sichuan Nature Conservation Foundation began the process of establishing Laohegou as the 1st Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jmammal/article/97/2/589/2459748 by SCD -UNIVERSITE DE TOURS user on 05 June 2025 land trust reserve in China (Huang et al. 2014). This study was part of a new effort to develop noninvasive genetic sampling methods for monitoring carnivores in the new nature reserve.
The landscape in Laohegou is steep (~40% of the reserve is steeper than 40°) and rugged-the exceptions being the valley bottoms and ridgelines. Elevation in Laohegou ranges from 1,160 m at the bottom of the Main Valley to 3,479 m at the summit of Motianling Mountain. Temperatures range from -4°C to 12°C and annual precipitation is 950-1,300 mm. The forest types along an elevational gradient include evergreen forest (< 1,800 m; mainly secondary forest because of past logging), deciduous forest (1,800-2,400 m; with patches of planted forest), conifer-deciduous mixed forest (2,400-2,800 m), coniferous forest (2,800-3,200 m), and alpine meadow (> 3,200 m). Bamboo is found at all elevations in the forest understory.
Our study area was restricted to the Main Valley in Laohegou (~70 km 2 ); a watershed that receives 15 separate drainages and is surrounded by mountain ridges (Fig. 1). Along the Main Valley outside Laohegou's boundaries, local people are primarily agriculturalists and some are pastoralists. Local people from the nearby Gaocun Township have historically used the Main Valley in Laohegou for harvesting wood for fuel, hunting animals and gathering plants for food, raising bees for honey, and collecting herbs for traditional Chinese medicine.
Laohegou is at the north edge of a biodiversity hotspot in southwestern China (Brooks et al. 2006). Using remote cameras, Li et al. (2012) detected 9 species of mammalian carnivores and 7 species of ungulates, including giant pandas, Asiatic black bears (Ursus thibetanus), Asian golden cats (Catopuma temminckii), leopard cats (Prionailurus bengalensis), masked palm civets, yellow-throated martens (Martes flavigula), Siberian weasels, Chinese ferret badgers (Melogale moschata), hog badgers (Arctonyx collaris), wild boar (Sus scrofa), forest musk deer (Moschus berezovskii), tufted deer (Elaphodus cephalophus), Reeve's muntjac (Muntiacus reevesi), takin (Budorcas taxicolor), Chinese serow (Capricornis milneedwardsii), and Chinese goral (Naemorhedus griseus). Although Li et al. (2012) did not identify rodents by species, Wang et al. (2003) identified 21 species to the northeast in Tangjiahe National Nature Reserve.
Hair-snaring devices.-We recorded the behavior of our target species to determine their relative preferences for using 4 types of hair-snaring devices and evaluated the effectiveness of each device at collecting their hair. Hereafter, we refer to devices generally as lure "sticks" or ground "cubbies". We evaluated 1-door and 2-door cubbies and refer to sticks with barbed wire as "barbed-sticks" and those with glue sheets as "sticky-sticks" (Fig. 3). We cut each stick to 130 × 5 × 5 cm and pounded each into the ground (30 cm). For barbed-sticks, we wrapped barbed wire with 6 barbs around the upper half  of the stick (Fig. 3). For sticky-sticks, we evenly spaced and fastened 6 glue-impregnated cardboard sheets designed to trap mice (5 × 2.5 cm; Catchmaster, Atlantic Paste & Glue Co., Brooklyn, New York) to the upper half of the stick using thumbtacks (Fig. 3). We constructed ground cubbies out of plastic (Guangyu Packaging Material Co., Ltd., Zhongshan, China) in a similar fashion as those specified in Schwartz et al. (2006), except 1-door cubbies had 3 gun brushes rather than 6 (Fig. 3). We used 8-cm gun brushes (diameter = 0.8 cm; Aolei Brushmaking Factory, Shanghai, China) for all cubbies, reducing the possibility of a weasel entering the trap and not touching a gun brush. We fastened each cubby to the ground using bamboo stakes.
We baited each device with a chicken wing and scent lure (Carman's Magna-Glan Lure, Russ Carman, New Milford, Pennsylvania). We nailed 1 chicken wing to the top of each stick and applied scent lure to the edge of a sponge (with reinforced top) that acted as a spacer between the stick and the chicken wing (Fig. 3). It is important to note that sponge spacers were used to retain the scent, while reducing the possibility of the lure contaminating hair samples and the top of the wood stick. We also fastened 1 chicken wing to the inside, center of each cubby using a strand of bailing wire and applied scent lure to the tip of a small branch of bamboo jammed into the ground next to each cubby.
Sampling.-In March-June of 2014, we monitored 13 sets of devices (hereafter, stations) at locations where we had previously detected civets and weasels via remote cameras in the Main Valley (Fig. 1). At each station, we installed 3 devices (both stick types and a 2-door cubby) in a triangular array on flat ground along game trails (Fig. 3). Half way through the experiment, we installed a 1-door cubby at 5 stations where animals had visited (Fig. 3). We positioned all devices 1-m apart to ensure that animals would not climb or jump from 1 device to another, guaranteeing passage over the barbs, gun brushes, or glue sheets before feeding on the bait. We used 2 different infrared-triggered remote cameras (one at each station) to detect animals and to examine their behavior: RECONYX PC 900 (RECONYX, Inc., Holmen, Wisconsin), which were set to take 10 pictures after each trigger without delay; and Ltl-6210MC (Ltl Acorn Electronics Co., Ltd., Shenzhen, China), which were set to take 3 pictures and 12 s of video after each trigger without delay.
We attempted to visit each station every 4 days to collect hair samples, re-bait sticks and cubbies, and replace memory cards and batteries. We collected hair samples from barbs in the field by removing each hair sample using forceps and sterilizing each barb with a lighter. If we collected hair samples on glue sheets or gun brushes, we first removed each unit, replaced it, and then inserted each sample into a separate coin envelope for transport. In the laboratory, we used forceps to disentangle hairs from gun brushes. We sterilized forceps (before handling each hair sample and after hair was removed from gun brushes) in the lab by the flame of an alcohol lamp to avoid DNA contamination. We stored all envelopes in a sealed glass jar with desiccant until genetic analysis was conducted at Peking University.
Genetic analysis.-We attempted to identify the species of each hair sample using genetic analysis. Our genetics laboratory team was "blind" to the information recorded by remote cameras (i.e., species ID) and to the geographic location of the station from which the hair was collected. Preliminary experiments indicated that we could obtain sufficient DNA from 5 guard hair follicles; therefore, we clipped 5 guard hair roots and extracted DNA from each sample with Trans Direct Animal Tissue PCR Kit (TransGen Biotech Co., Ltd., Beijing, China). If < 5 guard hairs with follicles were present in the sample, we used what follicles were available. We incubated hairs at 55°C in 30 μl AD1 and 5 μl AD2 of lysis buffer for 20 min; inactivated at 95°C for 3 min on a H 2 O 3 -PRO drybath (Coyote Bioscience, Inc., Beijing, China); added 30 μl AD3 buffer; and stored in -20°C. For species identification, we amplified a fragment of 16S rRNA gene (ca. 380 bp in length) using the primers 16s-F: 5′-GAGAAGACCCTATGGAGC-3′ and 16s-R: 5′-ATAGAAACCGACCTGGAT-3′; as determined during this study, this fragment unambiguously assigned all known mammalian species in the study area.
We performed the PCR amplification (with a Thermo Thermal Cycler; Type: 5020) in 20 μl of reaction mixture: 1 μl genomic DNA, 1 μl of each primer (10 μmol/l), 2 μl of dNTPs (2.5 mmol/l), 2 μl of 10× EasyTaq buffer (Mg 2+ plus), 1 μl of EasyTaq polymerase (5 U/μl, TransGen), and 12 μl of ddH 2 O. We denatured the amplification conditions at 94°C for 3 min; conducted 35 cycles of denaturing at 94°C for 30 s; annealed at 55°C for 30s; and conducted extension and final extension at 72°C for 20 s and at 72°C for 10 min, respectively. We checked the PCR products on 1% agarose gel and then sequenced on an ABI PRISM 3730 Genetic Analyzer from both directions with the same primers for PCR amplification. We obtained sequences for identifying species (P. larvata: KP233214.1; M. sibirica: NC_020637.1; Niviventer confucianus: NC_023960.1) with BLAST in GenBank.
Analytical procedures.-We measured the relative preference each species had for the devices using photos and videos recorded by remote cameras. We also measured the relative effectiveness of devices by evaluating the ability of each device at collecting guard hair from each species. We defined a "session" as the time period between our visits to a station. We defined each "detection" as a positive identification of a species from a photo or from DNA derived from hair.
We used 2 statistical methods to evaluate the relative preference of devices for each species. An animal "visited" a certain device when an individual climbed a lure stick or entered a cubby (Fig. 3; Supporting Information S1). As determined by remote cameras, we assessed the relative preference animals have for devices by recording the number of sessions each device was visited first and the total number of recorded visits at each type of device. We used a set of chi-square tests to determine if the number of first visits for each species were different than expected among devices for each configuration and between sticks and cubbies at 4-device stations. We used a Kruskal-Wallis test to determine if average number of visits per session for each species at 4-device stations were different among devices, and Mann-Whitney U-tests to compare the average number of visits between sticks and cubbies, between the 2 types of cubbies, and between the 2 types of sticks.
We used 3 analyses to evaluate the effectiveness of each device at collecting guard hair. We restricted our analyses to guard hair because follicles from guard hair generally contain higher quality DNA than underfur (Paetkau 2003). We defined a "hair sample" as all hairs collected from a single barb, glue sheet, or gun brush during a single session. We assigned each hair sample to 1 of 3 groups according to the number of guard hairs (1-5, 6-10, > 10) collected in each sample. We grouped hairs as such because we found that 5 hair follicles was an optimum sample size for identifying a species via genetic analysis of a hair sample. In addition, because genotyping success for individual identification is typically higher for carnivores when samples consist of 10 hairs or more (Goossens et al. 1998; O' Mahony et al. 2015), and pilot work has shown that hair samples for civets and weasels are either very large (much greater than 10 hairs) or small (≤ 5), we decided to categorize samples by size when collected, aiming to pay particular attention to samples with > 10 guard hairs.
For the first 2 analyses, we compared the average number of hair samples collected at each device and the average number of hair samples with > 10 guard hairs. We constrained these analyses to sessions when devices either collected hair or collected hair with > 10 guard hairs. We used a Kruskal-Wallis test to determine if devices collected similar numbers of hair samples (both total number of samples and samples with > 10 guard hairs) per session. We then used Mann-Whitney U-tests to compare the average number of hair samples collected per session between sticks and cubbies, between the 2 types of cubbies, between the 2 types of sticks, and to conduct pairwise comparisons of devices that collected > 10 guard hairs. For our final analysis, we compared the detection rates of all devices, including cameras. We defined the detection rate of a device as the number of sessions a species was detected by a device by the total number of sessions the species was detected by all devices.
We used R (R Core Team 2015) to conduct all statistical analyses. We used the aforementioned statistical analyses and a qualitative assessment of photos and videos to determine which methods were "best" for future genetic sampling of civets and weasels in Southwest China. Even though we set α = 0.05, we note that rejecting or failing to reject the null based on P values was not the goal of most comparisons. Instead, we were more interested in using these results (e.g., from comparing means) to help inform our decision as to what methods were best to use in our future studies.

