[SECTION] (no title)
Facilitating coexistence between people and large carnivores in human-settled landscapes is a challenge of contemporary conservation. Reserves and protected areas rarely provide adequate space for wide-ranging carnivores (Hansen andRotella 2002, Hilty et al. 2006), resulting in substantial overlap between carnivore ranges and human-settled lands (Woodroffe 2000, Laliberte andRipple 2004). Although this overlap of people and carnivores can be detrimental to the carnivore population and create challenges for humans (Laliberte and Ripple 2004, Estes et al. 2011, Ripple et al. 2014), experience in Europe demonstrates that large carnivores can indeed persist and expand in highly developed landscapes given supportive public opinions, protective legislation, and effective conflict mitigation to promote coexistence (Chapron et al. 2014).
In some regions of North America, as in Europe, populations of grizzly bears (Ursus arctos) overlap humansettled and developed areas (Dood et al. 2006, Alberta Sustainable Resource Development 2008). In Alberta, Canada, grizzly bear home ranges along the Rocky Mountain front overlap multiple land uses, creating potential for human-bear conflicts. The last population estimate in Alberta was conducted from 2004 to 2008. Using DNAbased, capture-mark-recapture methods and habitat modeling, the Provincial Government estimated a grizzly bear population of 691 in Alberta (Alberta Sustainable Resource Development and Alberta Conservation Association 2010). Based largely on this low estimated population size, increasing human activity, and continued development associated with natural resource extraction within grizzly bear habitats, Alberta listed the grizzly bear as provincially threatened in 2010.
However, public perception of grizzly bear numbers in some regions of Alberta differs from the government's estimate. For example, the last population estimate of 51 grizzly bears in southwestern Alberta occurred in 2007 (Alberta Grizzly Bear Inventory Team 2008). Local residents, however, believe that this estimate is low and they often are encountering grizzly bears in new areas (Quinn and Alexander 2011). Further, grizzly bear conflicts in this region have been increasing for the last 16 years (Morehouse 2016), and one possible explanation for this increase is an increasing grizzly bear population. This apparent disconnect between local perceptions and provincial-level wildlife management has resulted in frustration within local communities. To most effectively manage the grizzly bear population, a robust, transparent monitoring framework and updated population density and abundance estimates are crucial from an ecological standpoint and for gaining local confidence in the data, which in turn may ensure more support for management actions.
Estimating grizzly bear population size in southwestern Alberta is challenging for 2 main reasons. First, the bears are part of a much larger regional population that includes southeastern British Columbia and northern Montana (Proctor et al. 2012). This lack of population closure has confounded the ability to provide meaningful abundance and density estimates. Partitioning an Alberta portion of this inter-jurisdictional grizzly bear population as a separate management unit has no ecological basis. However, because grizzly bears are managed according to provincial and state jurisdictions (Ministry of Environment, Lands and Parks 1995, Dood et al. 2006, Alberta Sustainable Resource Development 2008), there is a need to have population estimates specific to Alberta. Second, grizzly bear life histories and dominance hierarchies (Craighead et al. 1995, Elfstr€ om et al. 2014) also might confound our ability to estimate population size using mark-recapture methods. Mark-recapture estimators assume that marked and unmarked animals are captured randomly (Krebs 2009). Sampling only high-quality habitats (e.g., high resource selection function [RSF] scores) might be biased toward dominant individuals if dominant individuals show higher recapture rates (Fretwell 1969, Kendall andMcKelvey 2008). Additionally, seasonal variation in density will not be captured by the typically short survey windows of markrecapture designs that are used to minimize violation of the closure assumption (Otis et al. 1978, Carretta et al. 1998, Harris et al. 2013). Failure to account for behavioral differences between sexes also could influence population estimates. For example, rub trees are commonly used to estimate abundance (Stetz et al. 2010, Sawaya et al. 2012), and male bears rub more frequently than do females (Harting et al. 1987). We used non-invasive genetic sampling across a range of habitats and seasons to estimate grizzly bear density and abundance. We used spatially explicit capture-recapture models (SECR) to estimate the density and abundance of grizzly bears with home-range centers in Alberta (i.e., Alberta bears) because these numbers are necessary for regional management. However, because southwestern Alberta is a small part of a larger international population, we were interested not only in the number of Alberta bears but also an estimate of the total number of grizzly bears using the area. When animals move in and out of the study area, this larger superpopulation can be of greater ecological interest than the number of animals estimated to be within the trapping array (Kendall 1999). We wanted to estimate the number of animals using the study area because that number might better represent the bears that local residents are encountering. Our objective was to provide updated population information for southwestern Alberta and help to reconcile some of the discrepancies between the past population estimate and local perceptions of grizzly bear numbers.

[SECTION] study area
We studied the grizzly bear population in a 3,600-km 2 area of southwestern Alberta, Canada bounded by Highway 3 to the north, British Columbia to the west, Montana, USA to the south, and the approximate edge of current grizzly bear range to the east (Fig. 1). Provincially, our study area is known as Bear Management Area 6 (BMA6), and comprised 2 zones, the Recovery Zone (1,814 km 2 ) and the Support Zone (1,774 km 2 ). The Recovery Zone was comprised of predominately public lands and represents the area in which the provincial government explicitly intends to recover grizzly bears (Alberta Environment and Parks 2016). The Support Zone was intended to help maintain grizzly bears with home ranges that were not exclusively contained within the Recovery Zone; road density thresholds that applied in the Recovery Zone (0.6 km/km 2 ) were relaxed for the Support Zone (0.75 km/km 2 ; Alberta Environment and Parks 2016). Grizzly bears in southwestern Alberta also occur outside of the Recovery and Support Zones, but their presence in those areas was not required to meet the objectives of the provincial grizzly bear recovery plan (Alberta Environment and Parks 2016). The provincial government modified BMA6 boundaries during the course of our study (Alberta Sustainable Resource Development and Alberta Conservation Association 2010, Alberta Environment and Parks 2016), and as a consequence our sampling included a small area outside of the southeastern corner of the provincial Support Zone.
The study area was a mix of privately owned (60%) and public lands (40%) under the jurisdiction of the Alberta provincial government (Crown land) and the Canadian federal government (Waterton Lakes National Park). A sharp transition from prairies and agricultural land in the east to mountainous terrain in the west characterized the study area; there were limited foothills. Heavy winds, cold winters, and warm dry summers characterized the climate. Temperatures ranged from À358 C to 328 C and precipitation averaged 36 cm annually in Pincher Creek, Alberta (Alberta Agriculture and Rural Development 2016). In addition to grizzly bears, wolves (Canis lupus), cougars (Puma concolor), and American black bears (Ursus americanus) also were present. Available native ungulate prey included white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus), mule deer (O. hemionus), elk (Cervus canadensis), moose (Alces alces), and bighorn sheep (Ovis canadensis). Domestic cattle and to a lesser extent domestic sheep also were present. The region is a multipleuse landscape with uses that include recreation, forestry, and oil and gas production. The predominant land use, however, was agriculture including both livestock and crop production (Statistics Canada 2006).

[SECTION] field methods
We used non-invasive genetic methods to monitor the grizzly bear population in BMA6. Non-invasive genetic sampling for grizzly bears typically involves collecting hair samples from baited hair-snag corrals (Woods et al. 1999, Mowat andStrobeck 2000) or bear rub objects (e.g., tree, power pole, fence post; Kendall et al. 2008Kendall et al. , 2015;;Stetz et al. 2010). As a result of repeated rubbing, the rub object often develops distinguishing characteristics such as a smooth or discolored rub surface, presence of a bear trail, or presence of bear hair (Stetz et al. 2010, Sato et al. 2014). Rubbing is a natural bear behavior; bears will rub on such objects apparently as a form of communication (Green andMattson 2003, Sato et al. 2014). All rub objects used in our study were either naturally occurring rubs or stretches of barbed wire fence through which bears naturally traveled. We did not use any lures or attractants.
From 2011 through 2014, we identified 899 rub objects across the study area. We trained field crews to identify and survey for rub objects along existing trail networks. On private lands without an existing trail network, we prioritized lands for sampling in a geographic information system (GIS) to identify areas with high bear use based on existing RSF models (Northrup et al. 2012), grizzly bear conflict records, and by working with landowners to identify travel corridors. We use the term rub object loosely because it includes objects on which bears rubbed and stretches of barbed wire fence that Figure 1. The study area for non-invasive genetic monitoring of grizzly bears in southwestern Alberta, Canada. Colors correspond to the year the rub object (e.g., tree, power pole, fence pole) was set-up for inclusion in our project. Together, the Recovery Zone and Support Zone comprise Bear Management Area 6 (BMA6; i.e., the study area).
bears traveled along or through. Each rub site was uniquely numbered, and we attached 4-pronged barbed wire to the rub object with fencing staples to facilitate hair collection. On fence crossings, we marked the specific stretch of fence line to be sampled. We ensured that we had sampling stations within each 7 Â 7-km cell of the sampling grid used in the previous 2007 BMA6 grizzly bear population estimate (Alberta Grizzly Bear Inventory Team 2008). Field crews visited rub objects every 3 weeks from approximately late May through mid-November for 8 visits/field season (first visit to clean, 7 subsequent visits to sample). Each barbed wire end represented a unique sample collection point, and we removed all hairs from barbed wire ends to ensure that we knew the deposition period for the sample (Kendall et al. 2009, Stetz et al. 2010). We passed a flame over each barb after hair collection to prevent contamination in the next collection cycle (Kendall et al. 2009, Stetz et al. 2010).
Further, to ensure that we did not miss any hair collection opportunities, to provide a second data source to improve precision of the estimate (Boulanger et al. 2008), and to engage the public, we also allowed for opportunistically collected hair samples (e.g., samples from bears trapped for management purposes, samples collected at bear-conflict sites). We focused opportunistic hair collection on private agricultural lands within the Support Zone. Opportunistic hair samples were collected by field crews, landowners, and Solicitor General Fish and Wildlife officers who were trained in proper hair-collection methods. Opportunistic samples allowed us to detect bears not detected by our rub-object methods. The first 2 years of our study (2011 and 2012) were primarily set-up years, and we collected hair samples less frequently. Therefore, we report on 2013 and 2014 genetic data only. All methods were approved by the University of Alberta Animal Care Committee (Animal Use Protocol #AUP00000008).

[SECTION] genetic methods
We stored all hair samples in paper coin envelopes with silica desiccant at room temperature until the end of each field season. After each field season, we sent hair samples to Wildlife Genetics International (WGI) to identify species, individual identity, and sex via analysis of nuclear DNA extracted from hair follicles following protocols outlined by Paetkau (2003Paetkau ( , 2004)). We used the G10J marker for species assignment to American black bear versus grizzly bear (Mowat et al. 2005, Kendall et al. 2015). Multi-locus genotyping followed Paetkau's (2004) 3-phase process of first pass, error check, and clean-up using the established 8-locus marker system (7 microsatellites plus the amelogenin marker for sex) for grizzly bears in the southern Rocky Mountain region (Paetkau et al. 1995, Paetkau 2003). After individuals were identified, 1 high-quality sample from each individual was extended to 2 additional microsatellite markers (CXX110 and MU50); these 10-locus genotypes were used for comparisons with a South Rockies database to ensure no 1 or 2 mismatch pairs (i.e., pairs of samples with genotypes that match at all but 1 or 2 microsatellite markers) were present (Paetkau 2003, Kendall et al. 2008).
In 2011, we analyzed all hair samples from our project and used these data to evaluate various sub-sampling strategies because analyzing all hair samples from future (2012-2014) field seasons would have been cost prohibitive. In 2011, we found that we most typically detected only 1 bear per rub and date combination. Based on our 2011 data and the recommendation of WGI, we sub-sampled hairs from 2013 and 2014 by genetically analyzing every third hair sample from a given rub and date combination. This subsampling strategy allowed us to maximize detections of individuals while working within our funding constraints. We did not sub-sample opportunistic hair samples. We analyzed samples with !1 guard hair root or 5 underfur hairs.

[SECTION] analysis
We used DNA-based grizzly bear encounter histories and SECR models to estimate density of grizzly bear homerange centers across the study area (Efford et al. 2004, Borchers and Efford 2008, Efford and Fewster 2013, Whittington and Sawaya 2015). Spatially explicit capturerecapture models offer advantages over conventional capture-mark-recapture methods because they automatically allow for capture heterogeneity, are more robust to the violation of the population-closure assumption, and provide derived abundance estimates related to a specified geographical region (Obbard et al. 2010, Efford andFewster 2013). Spatially explicit capture-recapture fits an observation model and a state model to individual spatial-detection histories (Efford et al. 2009, Efford andFewster 2013). The observation model describes the decaying probability of detection as a function of the distance between trap (i.e., rub object) location and an animal's home-range center. The state model uses a spatial Poisson point process to describe the intensity of animal home-range centers in space. We fit each model using a binomial distribution and a hazard halfnormal detection function; the parameter l 0 is the cumulative hazard of detection and is related to the probability of detection at the home-range center via the following equation: gðd Þ ¼ 1 À expðÀlðd ÞÞ; where g is the probability of detection and d is the distance between trap location and an animal's home-range center (Efford et al. 2004(Efford et al. , 2009). The parameter s is the spatial scale parameter of the observation model (Efford et al. 2004(Efford et al. , 2009)). The state model consists of a single parameter: density (D; Efford et al. 2004Efford et al. , 2009)). We used the secr (version 2.9.5, http://www. otago.ac.nz/density/SECRinR.html, accessed 1 Jul 2015) package in program R (R Version 3.2.1, https://cran.rproject.org, accessed 1 Jul 2015) for all data analyses; functions described in the following paragraphs are specific to that package. We incorporated our opportunistic hair samples into grizzly bear detection histories following procedures similar to the unstructured spatial sampling described by Thompson et al. (2012), andRussell et al. (2012). We considered a grid cell searched if it was visited by our survey crews, Fish and Wildlife officers, or landowners. Because we could not quantify variation in search effort, we analyzed opportunistic hair samples as though there was a uniform chance that they would arise in each grid cell. In other words, we assumed that the observation process leading to the opportunistic hair samples was approximately uniform, and similar to Mollet et al. (2015), we did not include a covariate for search effort associated with the opportunistic hair samples. We believe this to be a justifiable assumption because field crews traveled consistently within the Support Zone on survey routes. Also, the increased effort represented by the opportunistic samples will affect precision, but not accuracy of SECR estimates (Mollet et al. 2015). We grouped all opportunistic hair samples into a single, separate (eighth) occasion as is often done with incidental samples in a traditional capture-markrecapture design (Kendall et al. 2009(Kendall et al. , 2015) ) and overlaid samples on a 7 Â 7-km grid that overlapped the Support Zone and a small portion of areas farther east that were prone to grizzly bear agricultural conflicts (65 grid cells). We used a 7 Â 7-km grid because that was the grid cell size determined to be optimal for the 2007 estimate (Alberta Grizzly Bear Inventory Team 2008), and because Thompson et al. (2012) reported that grid cell size did not substantially influence density estimates. We excluded grid cells that were not visited (47 grid cells searched in 2013, and 54 grid cells searched in 2014). Similar to the unstructured spatial sampling methods used by Thompson et al. (2012), Russell et al. (2012), andMollet et al. (2015), we assigned each opportunistic hair sample to the centroid location of the grid cell in which it fell. Thus, grid centroids became trap locations and we added them to our rub object locations in the trap layout file. Rub objects retained their original point locations.
Because there is a male bias in use of rub trees (Harting et al. 1987, Kendall et al. 2008, Clapham et al. 2012) and to allow for complete sex-specificity in all model parameters (Kendall et al. 2015), we estimated abundance of each sex separately, and then combined the estimates to provide a total density and home-range-center abundance estimate for BMA6. We analyzed the 2013 and 2014 data in 2 ways. First, because we were interested in year-specific estimates of model parameters, we considered each year separately to provide a density estimate for each year. Second, we combined the 2 years into a single model framework and considered each year a separate session. In the case of the multi-session analysis, we did not allow density to vary across sessions (i.e., years) but rather estimated a single density for the study area. We truncated the capture histories for known dead bears in the appropriate occasion. We did not truncate capture histories for bears relocated long distances (i.e., outside of BMA6) because we observed that 4 out of 13 of these bears returned to the study area; additional bears might have returned but were not redetected by our sampling. Additionally, we allowed observation model parameters to vary by trap type, time trend (over occasions), a trap-specific behavioral response (step change after first detection of individual at a site; Efford 2016), and, in the multi-session analysis, session (i.e., year). We included trap type as a covariate to account for differences in behavior or sampling; we considered 3 categories for trap type: rub, fence, and opportunistic samples. Because the frequency of rubbing varies between males and females throughout the season (Clapham et al. 2012), we included time trend as a linear covariate.
Although we did not use any lure or bait, we included a trap-specific behavioral response because we believed that individual bears might have tree preferences or that the decision of a bear to rub might be influenced by dominance and social hierarchies. We included session in the multisession analysis to account for differences between years in movements and detection probabilities. Finally, because management agencies were interested in differences in grizzly bear density across public (Recovery Zone) and private (Support Zone) lands, we allowed D to vary between the 2 zones using a zone covariate. We defined the area of integration (i.e., state space) as the area in which our rub objects were located and a surrounding buffer zone; home-range centers can be distributed over this area of integration (Fig. S1, available online in Supporting Information). The buffer zone needed to be large enough that animals outside the buffer had a low probability of being detected, and thus were unlikely to influence density estimates (Efford andFewster 2013, Royle et al. 2014). Density estimates are robust to changes in the area of integration provided it is sufficiently large to encompass all animals with a non-negligible probability of capture (Efford andFewster 2013, Royle et al. 2014). Within secr, the mask defines the outer limit to the area of integration (Efford 2016); we used a mask with a buffer of 33 km for males and 18 km for females, or approximately 3 times the root pooled spatial variance (RPSV), which is a measure of the 2-dimensional dispersion of animal detection locations, around all trap locations. We used the mask. check command to ensure that we had selected an appropriate buffer size. We compared 17 a priori models with varying effects on l 0 , s, and D as discussed above for the single year data sets; for the multi-session analysis, we compared 28 models. We used Akaike's Information Criterion corrected for small samples (AIC c ) to identify the most parsimonious model (i.e., the lowest AIC c score; Burnham and Anderson 2002), and used the AIC c -weighted average from all models to estimate model parameters (Burnham andAnderson 2004, Burnham et al. 2011). Using the fxi.contour command, we plotted the estimated 50% probability density functions and modes for each individual grizzly bear for the 2013 and 2014 AIC cidentified top models (Borchers and Efford 2008). The probability density function of animal home range centers in area A is
where p(X) is the probability density of range centers across the mask, and v i is the observed detection history of individual i (Borchers and Efford 2008). The plots generated by the fxi.contour describe only the likely positions of the home-range centers of bears that were detected; they do not include estimated home-range centers of undetected bears. Additionally, fxi.contour plots can be prone to artifacts such as concentric clustering of estimated home-range centers around the traps themselves (Efford 2014). We include these plots, however, to illustrate the relationship between estimated home-range centers and our study area boundaries and differences in estimated home-range center locations between years. Finally, we used the model-averaged density estimates from the year-specific and multi-session models to calculate expected grizzly bear home-range center abundance for each sex within the Recovery and Support Zones by multiplying D by the area of interest. We summed Recovery and Support Zone estimates to provide a total abundance estimate for BMA6.
Abundance estimates derived from SECR are representative of the number of bears with home-range centers within the study area only and do not represent the number of bears using the study area. When an estimated home-range center fell outside the study area, that animal was not counted in the density estimate; thus, it was possible to detect more animals than the estimated population size. We, however, were interested in the number of resident bears and the number of bears using the study area because bears in our study area are part of a much larger population that includes bears in both British Columbia and Montana. To estimate the number of bears using the study area, we used a traditional capturemark-recapture (CMR) population model to estimate the population of grizzly bears using the study area at some point during our field sampling, recognizing that this design expands the sampled population substantially into adjacent jurisdictions. We used Chao's Mh model (Chao 1987) because it has been justified for use in Alberta and British Columbia to estimate bear abundance (Boulanger et al. 2002(Boulanger et al. , 2004; Alberta Grizzly Bear Inventory Team 2008), and has performed well in terms of confidence interval coverage and bias, even with sparse data (Chao 1989;Boulanger et al. 2002Boulanger et al. , 2004)). We used the Mh Chao model to estimate the number of male and female grizzly bears that used the study area at some point during each year. We then combined these sex-specific estimates for a year-specific estimate of the number of grizzly bears using our study area. The area of integration (Fig. S1) for our SECR models identifies the area over which home-range centers can be distributed. Bears outside the area of integration have a negligible probability of detection, and as such, we might expect that our CMR estimate samples bears from within this area. However, because we cannot explicitly define the area for which the CMR estimate applies, we cannot estimate density from our CMR models.

[SECTION] recovery
In this region, however, the ecologically appropriate scale is quite large. Recent genetic work by Proctor et al. (2012) revealed interbreeding among grizzly bears in the southern Rocky Mountain subpopulation within an area defined by Highway 3 to the north, the Rocky Mountain Trench to the west, the southern end of the Bob Marshall Wilderness to the south, and the eastern edge of grizzly bear range to the east (Proctor et al. 2012: fig. 19). In recent years, Alberta, Montana, and British Columbia have all used similar noninvasive genetic methods to monitor grizzly bears (Alberta Grizzly Bear Inventory Team 2008, Kendall et al. 2009, Stetz et al. 2010). Ideally, monitoring methods and timing would be standardized across jurisdictions so the population could be monitored collaboratively at a larger scale relevant to the biology of the bears (Proctor et al. 2012). From a management perspective, however, such boundaries might be considered too large and impractical.
Under the current management plans, there is still a need for area managers to have information that is specific to the bear management area of interest. In this context, we believe SECR offers a useful tool. Monitoring and analyzing the data at a larger scale would allow for more informed models of density and abundance. Because SECR is a spatial model, jurisdiction-specific information could be extracted after the regional analysis was complete. Monitoring at an ecologically appropriate scale would help overcome some of the issues that have plagued past population models (e.g., lack of closure, incomplete detection histories), and an interjurisdictional SECR analysis would allow for better informed information.
Animal behavior and life-history traits have the potential to influence how likely an individual is to be detected (O'Connell et al. 2006). For example, dominant individuals might have higher recapture rates (Fretwell 1969, Kendall andMcKelvey 2008); this problem could be exacerbated in baited designs, or those sampling exclusively in highest quality habitats. Thus, rather than attempting to lure bears into a specific location, we let bear presence dictate our sampling locations. However, not every bear uses rub objects, and male grizzly bears are more likely to rub than female grizzly bears, particularly in the early season (during the first occasion; Table 1). Thus, we also included opportunistically collected hair samples, providing an important second data source that allowed us to detect 39 bears that were not detected at our rub objects. Additionally, opportunistic hair samples provided an opportunity to directly engage the community and regional Fish and Wildlife agency staff in our research.
Local knowledge was important not only in the collection of opportunistic hair samples, but also in helping to identify areas of bear activity and presence on private lands. Detection probabilities can be influenced by habitat, site-specific conditions, sampling effort, and density (Bailey et al. 2004, Gu and Swihart 2004, Smith et al. 2007, Haynes et al. 2013); the best (i.e., accurate and precise) results are obtained when capture probability is high (Lukacs and Burnham 2005). If sampling stations are placed in areas not frequented by bears, we would expect fewer bears to be detected. We selected survey locations on private land largely in consultation with the landowner and this information supplemented survey areas that we had a priori identified through use of various GIS data layers; we believe our surveys were improved by the incorporation of local knowledge. Local ecological knowledge can provide valuable insights to contemporary field ecology (Berkes 2004, Moller et al. 2004, Service et al. 2014), and engaging communities in research and management can help to facilitate long-term coexistence between people and large carnivores (Redpath et al. 2013). Not only can local knowledge improve data collection (Huntington 2000, Zukowski et al. 2011, Service et al. 2014), but engaging stakeholders in the collection of data also helps to establish mutual trust, an important component to the successful conceptualization of ecosystem conservation and management (Berkes 2004).

[SECTION] management implications
Alberta's BMA6 is small (3,600 km 2 ) relative to the area of the larger Rocky Mountain population including Alberta, British Columbia, and Montana ($35,000 km 2 ) in which this international grizzly bear population lives (Proctor et al. 2012); grizzly bears move freely across these geographical boundaries. Because SECR estimates the density of homerange centers in an area, changes from year to year can reflect a shift in animal home-range centers rather than a change in overall population density, particularly in areas where the boundaries of the monitoring area do not align with the ecological boundaries of the population being monitored. Thus, we recommend multi-year monitoring at an ecologically appropriate scale. Further, both resident and nonresident bears have the potential to be involved in conflict. Several tools are available to help mitigate conflict between grizzly bears and human land-use activities (e.g., electric fencing, bear-proof grain bin doors). When making management decisions regarding the allocation of resources to help prevent conflicts, the number of resident bears and the number of bears using the area should be considered.
Finally, because the ecological boundaries of the grizzly bear population are large, we recommend increased coordination across jurisdictions. Currently, 3 management plans govern the same grizzly bear population (Ministry of Environment, Lands and Parks 1995, Dood et al. 2006, Alberta Environment and Parks 2016). In British Columbia, there is a limited-entry hunting season on grizzly bears (Ministry of Environment, Lands and Parks 1995). By contrast, in Montana, the grizzly bear is listed as threatened under the United States Endangered Species Act, and has been since 1975 (United States Fish and Wildlife Service 1993), and likewise the species is classified as threatened under the provincial Wildlife Act in Alberta. Clearly, interjurisdictional grizzly bear management would be more pertinent for this trans-boundary grizzly bear population.

[SECTION] acknowledgments
Over 30 people assisted in the collection of field data; this project would not be possible without their contributions. In particular, we thank A. E. Loosen, M. B. Urmson, S. J. Rettler, and T. M. Malish who worked on the project for multiple seasons. B. Dolan, P. Frame, G. C. Hale, B. Johnston, D. Madsen, and N. F. Webb provided helpful comments on study design and data collection, and provided government agency perspective throughout the project. K. C. Kendall shared valuable information on field methods. Additionally, over 70 landowners provided land access or collected opportunistic hair samples; we are thankful for their support. In particular, we thank the Waterton Biosphere Reserve's Carnivore Working Group for supporting the project and helping to facilitate communication with landowners. We thank M. G. Efford for assistance with analysis and feedback on our results. G. B. Stenhouse and 2 anonymous reviewers provided helpful comments on an earlier version of this manuscript. Finally, we thank the Alberta Government for providing spatial GIS layers.

