[SECTION] occurrence data
We used non-invasive genetic sampling to survey for fisher presence across the study area (Zielinski et al., 2006;Kendall and McKelvey, 2008). Several different sampling designs were used to deploy hair snares. The majority of hair snares were deployed across a grid consisting of 5 by 5 mile cells, with approximately 4 snares per grid cell. The choice of grid cell size and number of snares was based on the literature and preliminary data (Zielinski and Kucera, 1995;Squires et al., 2004;Schwartz et al., 2006). We limited the area surveyed to all areas in Idaho and Montana with predicted fisher habitat, as determined by the USGS GAP analysis data. Once the 5 mi 2 grid was overlaid on all fisher habitat, we limited potential survey grid cells to those with greater than 50% fisher habitat, which resulted in 1689 potential grid cells for survey. From 2007 to 2011, we surveyed 610 of these cells, chosen largely by availability to access during the winter. The remainders of the cells were part of a finer scale survey for fisher lead by the Coeur d'Alene Tribe that deployed similar methodologies. In total we deployed 4846 hair-snares. We sequenced the cytochrome b region of the mitochondrial DNA genome following the methods of Riddle et al. (2003) or Schwartz (2007) to determine the species that deposited the hair collected by the non-invasive snare and obtained 288 genetic samples of fisher DNA (at 279 unique locations). In addition to the non-invasive sampling, we also included harvest data reported by fur trappers in Montana from 1980 to 2010 (N = 47; Vinkey et al., 2006), resulting in a total sample size of 326 fisher locations. To examine the impact of using data collected from individuals that were part of a reintroduction effort, we considered a second dataset that did not include locations from a recent reintroduction of fishers in the Cabinet Mountains of Montana from 1989 to 1991, as defined by Heinemeyer (1993).
Species distribution modeling can be sensitive to the extent of the background chosen; thus, selecting an extent that is overly large or small may influence the predicted distribution (Elith et al., 2011). We chose the extent of the study area based on the minimum hydrologic boundaries that contained all fisher occurrences (Fig. 1). Fisher surveys rarely occurred in wilderness areas; thus, to prevent the use of these areas as background locations in modeling, we used a mask to remove all unsampled wilderness areas, as well as all rivers and lakes, from the study area before running the model.

[SECTION] environmental data
We initially considered a suite of vegetative, topographic, and climatic variables potentially important to fisher distribution (Zielinski et al., 2010;Purcell et al., 2009;Raley et al., 2012;Aubry et al., 2013; Table 1). Vegetation data were calculated from landcover maps produced by LandFire version 1.1 (U.S. Forest Service) and satellite imagery obtained from LandsatTM 5. We used the 'Canopy Cover' (CC), 'Canopy Height' (CH), and 'Existing Vegetation Type' (EVT) layers from LandFire. We transformed Canopy Cover, Canopy Height, and Existing Vegetation Type into continuous variables to reduce map inaccuracies. We did this by first simplifying the existing categorical values for each variable. Canopy cover was categorized into Non-Forest, 0-10%, 10-30% cover, 30-60% cover, and 60-100% cover. Canopy height was categorized to Non-Forest, 0-10 m, 10-20 m, and 25-50 m. Existing Vegetation Type (EVT) was categorized into Other (including urban, agricultural, non-forest, water, rock, and ice), Mixed Conifer (including Dry-Mesic Montane Mixed Conifer, Mesic Montane Mixed Conifer, and Ponderosa Pine Forest), Spruce-Fir (including Subalpine Woodland, Lodgepole Pine, Dry-Mesic Spruce-Fir, Mesic-Wet Spruce-Fir, and Aspen-Mixed Conifer Forest), Riparian (including Montane Riparian, Subalpine/Upper Montane Riparian, and Conifer Swamp), and Douglas Fir (including Montane Douglas-Fir Forest and Douglas-Fir Forest Alliance). Categories for EVT were determined based on visual analysis of the distribution of each existing LandFire category, so that categories that were in close spatial proximity and/or of similar ecological niche were grouped together into a single category. We then converted each newly created category into a binary variable using ArcMap v10, so that at any given location, the value for EVT Mixed Conifer was either 1 (Mixed Conifer present) or 0 (Mixed Conifer absent). This binary variable was than smoothed using a circular 'moving window', so that each 100 m 2 raster cell represented the proportion of each LandFire variable category in a surrounding 900 m radius neighborhood. Thus from three categorical LandFire variables (CC, CH, and EVT), we created 14 indices of the proportion of each variable category in a 900 m neighborhood.
Since previous studies have indicated the importance of mesic and riparian forest types for fisher habitat in the U.S. Rocky Mountains (Jones and Garton, 1994;Roy, 1991;Schwartz et al., 2013), we also considered single categories of EVTs as possible predictors of fisher presence. For these variables, we used only Dry-Mesic Montane Mixed Conifer, Mesic Montane Mixed Conifer, and Montane Riparian Systems as binary variables, again with a moving window so that each 100 m pixel represented the proportion of a given forest type within a 900 m circular neighborhood. Aubry et al. (2013) show in a meta-analysis of fisher data from 8 studies conducted on the west coast of North America that both vegetation cover and a heat loading index (a metric that combines aspect, slope, and latitude on temperature accumulation) are  important for fisher habitat. Thus, we also used Landsat satellite imagery to calculate the tasseled cap vegetation indices. These include brightness, a measure of soil reflectivity, greenness, a measure of green vegetation, and wetness, a measure of moisture in the soil and vegetation (Kauth and Thomas, 1976).
For topographic variables, we used a 30 m digital elevation model (National Elevation Dataset, USGS) and derived slope, annual solar radiation, and topographic position index from this elevation layer using ArcGIS 10.0 (Environmental Systems Research Institute, 2011, Redlands, CA). Annual solar radiation was calculated using the 'Area Solar Radiation' tool, which calculates the total incoming direct, diffuse, and reflected insolation over the space of one year. Topographic position index (TPI) is a measure of terrain variability, with negative values indicating valleys and positive values indicating ridges (Weiss, 2001), and was found to be a significant predictor of fisher distribution in Schwartz et al's (2013) radiotelemetry-based habitat research in Idaho's Clearwater subbasin. We calculated TPI at three scales: 300 m, 1000 m, and 2000 m.
Climatic variables considered included mean annual precipitation, precipitation during the growing season, annual mean temperature, mean temperature during the coldest month of the year, mean temperature during the warmest month of the year, and the number of degree days less than zero. We used climate data compiled by the Moscow Forestry Sciences Laboratory (Rocky Mountain Research Station, U.S. Forest Service). Data was compiled from 1961 to 1990 at an 800 m spatial resolution.
All variables were created in raster format in ArcMap v10, and resampled to 100 m 2 resolution.

[SECTION] modeling
To avoid including highly correlated variables in the model, we screened all variables for pairwise correlation using Pearson's correlation coefficient in the statistical package R (R Development Core Team, 2010). We considered variables to be highly correlated if r P 0.7, and kept only the variable that best predicted fisher presence when used as a univariate predictor. This method of variable selection resulted in 18 variables for use in modeling (Table 2).
We ran two models in Maxent version 3.3.3e (Phillips et al., 2006;Phillips and Dudík, 2008), a 'full' model, including all 18 vegetative, topographic, and climatic variables, and a 'climate/topography only' model, including only six topographic and climatic variables (Table 3). We randomly partitioned the data into training and testing occurrences, with two thirds of the data used to train the model and one third of the data used for testing. We accepted the default values recommended by Maxent for the regularization multiplier (1), a constant supplied by the user which limits model overfitting, and the number of random background locations selected from the study area (N = 10,000) for use in constructing the distribution of environmental covariates. To generate measures of model variance, we used k-fold cross-validation (here we used 10-fold), which divides the data into k subsets and runs the model k times, each time using k-1 of the subsets for training, and a different subset for testing. This approach has the advantage of using all of the data for model training, as well as producing estimates of model variation by averaging model results over all k iterations of the model.
We evaluated model performance using the area under the curve (AUC) of a receiver operating characteristic (ROC) plot (Fielding and Bell, 1997). This metric plots sensitivity (or true positives) against 1 -specificity (or false positives) for a range of threshold values, with the area under the curve providing a measure of the ability of the model to discriminate between presences and absences. Models with an AUC of 0.5 are no better than random, while an AUC of 1.0 would provide perfect discriminatory ability.

[SECTION] future climate scenarios
To predict changes in fisher habitat due to changes in climate, we used future climate variables calculated by the Moscow Forestry Sciences Laboratory (USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station) which are based on 1961-1990 climate normals. We selected a single general circulation model (Hadley Centre Coupled Model, version 3; Collins et al., 2001). Under this model, we selected two emissions scenarios: A2, the more severe scenario, which represents an increasing population and more regional economic development, and B2, the more conservative scenario, which represents continuing but slower population growth and more emphasis on environmental protection (IPCC 2007). We chose these two scenarios to provide a lower and upper bound of projected fisher habitat, from conservative to severe. We also chose three time steps at which to project the model (2030, 2060, and 2090).
Once projected, we converted the future probability habitat maps into binary maps using a threshold value chosen to maximize the sum of sensitivity and specificity (Jiménez-Valverde and Lobo, 2007;Freeman and Moisen, 2008). We compared the percent loss or gain in suitable fisher habitat from current conditions to each future scenario by subtracting current fisher area from future fisher area, dividing by current fisher area, and multiplying by 100.

[SECTION] dispersal and patch size
Predicted future distributions may be inapplicable to a species if individuals are not able to physically keep up with the projected pace of a shifting distribution (Zhu et al., 2012). To model the effects of dispersal distance across non-habitat, we used the binary We then used a circular moving window in ArcMap v10 to create buffers of given dispersal distances around all suitable habitat from the current binary distribution. We used the ''Extract by Mask'' tool in ArcMap v10 to calculate areas in which this buffer and the four category future habitat maps overlapped, and counted only future suitable habitat (either suitable remaining suitable or unsuitable becoming suitable) within a specified dispersal distance as occupiable. We performed this analysis for each future time step and climate scenario, with dispersal distances at 1 km, 1.5 km, 2 km, 4 km, and 10 km, as well as no and unlimited dispersal.
In addition to the ability to physically reach newly suitable habitat, the patch size of the future habitat can also influence whether a species will be able to utilize newly available habitat. We used a patch size of 125 km 2 as the minimum size at which a population of fishers could be maintained, based on an average home range size of 25 km 2 per individual and an arbitrary minimum of five home ranges needed to maintain a population (Reed and Bryant, 2000). We based this home range size on the average between a male home range size of approximately 30-40 km 2 and a female home range of 10-16 km 2 (Arthur et al., 1989;Zielinski et al., 2004). We assume that each home range will have at least one female and potentially one male, as fishers of opposite sexes will tolerate home range overlap (Powell and Zielinski, 1994), as well as several juveniles, for a total population of between 6 and 25 individuals (Powell and Zielinski, 1994). We chose this number as the smallest possible population that could be maintained over the short term to allow long-term population persistence (Reed and Bryant, 2000).
To determine the impact of minimum patch size on future available habitat, we used the same binary habitat maps as were used for dispersal distances, detailed above. We converted each binary habitat raster to polygons using ArcMap v10. Each 100 m 2 raster cell was converted to a polygon, and all adjacent polygons were grouped. Each group of polygons represented one habitat patch. We then performed the same comparison as detailed in the dispersal section between the current binary habitat layer, buffered by various dispersal distances, and each future habitat layer grouped into four habitat suitability categories. In this case, however, the suitable habitat was only considered 'available' if it was within the given buffer distance and part of a patch that was greater than 125 km 2 . We then summed all available habitat patches that fit these criteria, and compared this to the amount of currently available habitat in patches greater than 125 km 2 to determine the percent change in available habitat. We again used dispersal distances of 1 km, 1.5 km, 2 km, 4 km, and 10 km, as well as no and unlimited dispersal.

[SECTION] current fisher distribution
The model showing current fisher distribution produced by Maxent using vegetative, topographic, and climatic variables performed well, with a test AUC of 0.87 (SD = 0.017). When we examined the effect of including animals reintroduced into the Cabinet Mountains on predicted fisher distribution, we found little difference in model outputs: for the model with no reintroduced locations, the testing AUC was 0.845 (SD = 0.020), the order of variable importance did not change, and the spatial distribution of predicted habitat suitability was visually indistinguishable (map not shown). Therefore, we used the model with both reintroduced and native fisher locations, and did not further consider the model in which Cabinet Mountain reintroduction animals were omitted.
The variables that contribute the most to fisher habitat suitability are 25-50 m canopy height (19.7%), montane riparian vegetation (16.3%), topographic position index (14.7%), and mean annual precipitation (13.3%; Table 2), as determined by percent contribution to the model, an index created by Maxent based on the increase in model performance with each variable addition. Mean temperature in the coldest month was also a good contributor to the model (6.3%). All other variables had an individual percent contribution to the model of 5% or less (Table 2). Marginal response curves generated by Maxent, which show predicted habitat suitability based on one variable while holding all other variables at their average value (Phillips et al., 2006), show that probability of suitable habitat was highest with greater presence of canopy height of 25-50 m, greater presence of montane riparian landcover, negative values of TPI (drainages), and greater mean annual precipitation. The current distribution of fisher within the study area, as predicted by the model, is shown in Fig. 2(A).
The same model, but without vegetation variables, produced a test AUC of 0.84 (SD = 0.018); variable importance is given in Table 3. In this model, the variables with the greatest percent contribution to the model were mean annual precipitation (33.9%), topographic position index (29%), and mean temperature of the coldest month (27.3%). Based on the marginal response curves, the probability of suitable fisher habitat was highest with greater mean annual precipitation, negative values of TPI, and mid values of mean temperature in the coldest month. The current distribution of fisher within the study area predicted by the climate/topography only model is shown in Fig. 2(B).
Using a threshold criterion of the maximized sum of specificity and sensitivity (0.102), the 'full' model estimated an area of 36,484 km 2 of suitable fisher habitat within the 140,818 km 2 study area. For the climate/topography-only model, the threshold value at which the sum of sensitivity and specificity were maximized was 0.220. Using this threshold, there are an estimated 30,746 km 2 of suitable fisher habitat within the study area. The differences in predicted habitat suitability between the full and the climate only model are shown in Fig. 3.

[SECTION] future fisher distribution
Predictions of future fisher distribution were based on the climate/topography-only model. Given the greater fossil-fuel use A2 scenario, fisher habitat is predicted to increase over each time step, with a 12.1% increase from current conditions to 2030, a 21.4% increase from current to 2060, and a 24.5% increase from current to 2090. Under scenario B2, the lower population, lower fossil-fuel use scenario, predicted fisher habitat is expected to undergo a similar, but less pronounced, expansion, with an initial decrease of 10.7% from current conditions to 2030, followed by an increase of 1.6% from current to 2060, and a final increase of 9.2% from current to 2090 (Fig. 4). The location of suitable fisher habitat is also predicted to change, with a greater probability of fisher occurrence in the northern portion of the study area (Fig. 4).

[SECTION] dispersal and patch size
The increases in fisher habitat mentioned above under various climate change scenarios assume unimpeded, complete dispersal. If fisher populations are completely unable to track the habitat changes produced by climate change, fisher habitat is expected to decrease under both emissions scenarios despite the overall net increase in predicted suitable habitat. Scenario A2 shows a more pronounced loss (47.0%) than scenario B2 (27.7%; Fig. 5A andC). However, the natural history of a habitat specialist with adequate dispersal abilities suggests that neither a full dispersal nor a no dispersal model is appropriate. Fig. 5 shows the percent increase in habitat associated with improvements in dispersal ability through non-habitat (e.g., agricultural valleys, cities, etc.). The most pronounced change occurred in the last time step of the A2 scenario climate model, where a change in dispersal from 1 km to 10 km increased available habitat by 37.3% (Fig. 5A).
When a minimum patch size of 125 km 2 is considered, the climate/topography-only model predicted approximately 23,895 km 2 of suitable fisher habitat under current conditions (a 22% decrease from the model with no patch size restrictions). The predicted future percent habitat gain is lower under both A2 and B2 scenarios, with a maximum gain of 20.2% by 2090 for the A2 scenario under unlimited dispersal (Fig. 5B), as compared to 24.5% with no patch size limit (Fig. 5A). Though decreased, habitat gains are still seen for three of the dispersal distances (unlimited, 10 km, and 4 km) by 2090 under the A2 climate scenario (Fig. 5B). Climate scenario B2 never results in a habitat gain when a minimum patch size is enforced, and instead incurs a habitat loss of 1.2% by 2090 under unlimited dispersal ability, and a loss of 41.7% with no dispersal ability (Fig. 5D).

