[SECTION] materials and methods
Wolf samples and DNA isolation DNA was extracted from several sample types: tissue (N = 25), blood (N = 14), scat (N = 87), saliva (freshly collected, N = 11, and collected from wounds of kills, N = 1), urine/snow mixture (N = 10), urine stains with oestrus blood (N = 4) and hair (N = 6) samples. Some samples were genotyped in duplicates or triplicates as internal controls: three tissue samples, five blood samples, nine scat samples, three saliva samples, one kill/ saliva sample, three urine and one oestrus blood/urine sample. For a list of samples, see Supplementary File 'sample_list.xlsx' on the Dryad data repository. Due to routine genetic wolf monitoring in Germany (Harms et al. 2011), individual identities and sexes of all samples were known, and in many cases, familial relationships had been established using pedigree reconstruction (V. Harms, unpublished data). Although mainly German samples were available to us, we also included samples from Italy (N = 8), Poland (N = 4), Slovakia (N = 1) and Hungary (N = 1) in order that as many alleles as possible are represented within our data set. To test for cross-species amplification, we included potential wolf prey species in our analyses because their DNA is expected to be present in wolf faeces or as contaminant DNA in saliva samples from wolf kills: Eurasian beaver Castor fiber (tissue; N = 4), wild boar Sus scrofa (tissue; N = 3), fox Vulpes vulpes (hair; N = 2), goat Capra aegagrus hircus (hair; N = 2), roe deer Capreolus capreolus (hair; N = 2), sheep Ovies aries (tissue; N = 2), wildcat Felis silvestris (hair; N = 2), and one of each cattle Bos primigenius taurus (hair), edible dormouse Glis glis (tissue), European hare Lepus europaeus (tissue), mouflon Ovis aries orientalis (tissue), and racoon Procyon lotor (tissue).
All DNA extractions were carried out using Qiagen Kits (Hilden, Germany) and QIAcube 230V robotics, as per manufacturer instructions. DNA from noninvasively collected samples was isolated in a laboratory room dedicated to processing of noninvasively collected sample material (Taberlet et al. 1999). We extracted DNA from tissue, frozen and/or in ethanol, and blood on FTA cards (Smith & Burgoyne 2004), with the Qiagen DNeasy Blood & Tissue Kit and diluted DNA to 5 ng/lL, as measured on a Nanodrop ND-1000 (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), for further analyses. Scat samples were stored in 96% ethanol at room temperature, typically for 1-2 weeks, until DNA isolation with the QIAamp DNA Stool Mini Kit, and kept at À20 °C for long-term storage. We processed saliva and hairs (singly or pooled tuft hairs), stored dry at room temperature, with the QIAamp DNA Investigator Kit. Urine was collected from snow, transported to the laboratory frozen, and DNA extraction was performed according to Hausknecht et al. (2007).

[SECTION] snp selection from affymetrix data
Single-nucleotide polymorphisms were initially selected from data on 79 European grey wolves genotyped for 60 584 SNPs on the Affymetrix v2 Canine SNP Array from the canfam2 dog genome assembly (vonHoldt et al. S1, Supporting information; unfortunately these 79 samples were not available to us for later stages of this study, that is for Fluidigm genotyping with our 96 SNP panel). Treating all wolves as one population, we filtered for segregating SNPs that had at least 10% observed heterozygosity and that showed no significant deviations from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE) using PLINK (Purcell et al. 2007), which resulted in 28 369 SNPs. From these, we excluded SNPs with genotype correlations of r 2 > 0.2 (also in PLINK), reducing the list to 17 299 SNPs (see Supplemental Methods in vonHoldt et al. 2011). Next, we excluded SNPs in known or hypothetical gene boundaries according to the canfam2 dog genome assembly and annotation (Lindblad-Toh et al. 2005) and picked 667 SNPs such that inter-SNP distances were at least 500 kb (final average 2.9 Mb).

[SECTION] assay development and genotyping
From the 667 SNP candidates, we selected 192 which were distributed on as many chromosomes as possible and designed two sets of 96 Fluidigm SNPtype assays to match the technical layout of Fluidigm's technology for genotyping biallelic SNPs on the '96.96 Dynamic Array Chip for Genotyping' (http://www.fluidigm.com). Similar to Amplifluor genotyping (see Rickert et al. 2004;Morin & McCarthy 2007), one pair of primers first amplifies the locus in which the SNP is located, followed by allele-specific internal PCR in which each allele-specific primer is fluorescently labelled. Before entering the genotyping reaction, all 96 SNP loci are preamplified in a so-called specific target amplification (STA) reaction, using 1.25 lL of template DNA (20 ng/lL by manufacturer recommendation) and all 96 locus-specific primers in the same PCR. For details of the method, see Nussberger et al. (2014).
Each of the two sets was genotyped on IFCs (integrated fluidic circuits) containing the above-mentioned samples and 11 nontemplate controls (NTCs). These IFCs harbour nanoscale PCR reaction chambers with reaction volumes of 6 nL, into which 96 samples and 96 SNP assays are loaded by the user. The dispersion of 96 assays by 96 samples into 9216 nano-PCR chambers is performed on Fluidigm IFC controllers (Wang et al. 2009). We modified the original genotyping protocol to accommodate for the low DNA quality and quantity of noninvasively collected samples. Initial STA products were diluted 1:10 instead of 1:100 as recommended by the manufacturer. The number of cycles were extended from 38 PCR cycles (recommended by the manufacturer; hereafter referred to as 'c1') to 42 cycles ('c2'), 46 cycles ('c3') and 50 cycles ('c4')-hereafter referred to as 'genotyping treatments'.
All NTCs showing significant fluorescence were invalidated manually before applying the clustering algorithm, a strategy advised by Fluidigm. Loci for which all NTCs had to be excluded were set to missing data in all samples. Note that NTC samples regularly display fluorescence signals in the absence of template DNA on the Fluidigm system. This is no point of particular concern. In the presence of template DNA, PCR competition will favour the matching target. Additionally, contamination can be excluded because those NTCs do not consistently yield genotypes across all SNP assays (Beatrice Nussberger and Fluidigm Support Service, personal communication). With careful scrutiny and exclusion of samples that fail at a large proportion of loci, it should be possible to filter out most if not all spurious genotypes. Eventually, visual inspection of genotype clustering across the four genotyping treatments favoured genotyping treatment 'c2' regarding the tradeoffs between cluster tightness, missing data values and error frequency. Thus, c2 was later used for calculations in the 'final' 96 SNP set (see Results for details).

[SECTION] genotype evaluation and error calculation
Across all four genotyping treatments and for every SNP, we curated cluster plots manually in a combined analysis of all 277 samples in the Fluidigm SNP GENOTYP- ING ANALYSIS SOFTWARE V3.1.2. Genotypes were exported into table format for further manual evaluation and genotyping error calculation. Three measures of genotyping consistency were employed: (i) general assay performance, (ii) genotyping consistency across dilution series and (iii) genotyping consistency across samples of the same individual. (i)General assay performance: for each SNP, we counted the number of samples which lacked an assigned genotype (missing data). Further, we counted how often a prey species sample was assigned a wolf SNP genotype (cross-species testing). (ii)Consistency across dilution series: we chose 23 samples of 'good-quality' DNA obtained from tissue or blood (hereafter referred to as 'reference samples') to determine rates of missing data and genotyping consistency across four DNA concentrations: 5 (reference sample), 2, 0.5 and 0.2 ng/lL. First, means of missing data counts for all loci across the 23 reference samples were calculated for all four concentrations. Second, genotypes of samples of the three dilutions were compared to the 5 ng/lL reference sample and errors scored either as allelic dropout (i.e. an allele present in the reference sample is absent in the dilution) or false allele (i.e. an allele present in the dilution is absent in the reference). Differences in rates of missing data or errors between dilution steps were tested for statistical significance with the wilcox.exact() test in R (R Development Core Team 2009) from the 'EXACTRANKTESTS' package because the data contained ties and nearly all data sets had a non-normal distribution [Shapiro-Wilk test in R, function shapiro.test()].
(iii)Genotyping consistency across samples of the same individual: for 38 wolves, we had multiple samples comprising one 'high-quality reference sample' and at least one noninvasively collected sample. Samples were considered 'failed' for a specific genotyping treatment when having >25% of SNPs showing missing data. Failed samples were excluded from this analysis to avoid sample bias. Similarly, SNP assays were considered 'failed' when >50% of nonexcluded samples (after having applied the 25% criterion above) showed missing data; these were also not included in evaluating genotyping error (assay bias avoidance). Allelic differences between reference sample and its noninvasively collected counterparts were scored as allelic dropout or false allele.

[SECTION] selection of the final 96 snp set
To achieve our target of selecting 96 reliable SNPs for the assay, we first excluded SNPs with missing data in >10% of the wolf samples from our initial 192 SNP set. Next, we excluded SNPs bearing two or more genotyping errors in the genotyping consistency check (measure iii). Combined, this led to a removal of 69 SNPs of the 192. To trim the total number of SNPs down to 96 (the number of SNPs that can be processed on the IFC), we removed the 27 SNPs with the visually lowest quality based on the SNP scatter plots of the genotyping software.
Additionally, we tested this final set of 96 SNPs for their performance regarding individual identification. As a preliminary means to approach this, we estimated the probability of identity (PID) and the probability of identity among siblings (PID sib ). We searched our data of German wolves (to not inflate statistical power by inclusion of remote populations) for one sample per individual, where we chose the sample with the least missing data when multiple samples were available. Then, we removed samples with missing data at more than 25% of loci (see above). PID and PID sib were calculated in GENAL-EX 6.501 (Peakall & Smouse 2006).

[SECTION] general assay performance (i)
Tables with raw genotype output are available via the Dryad data repository. Missing data rates per SNP were similar among genotyping treatments c1-c4 (Table 1): a median of 23 loci with missing data for c1 (1st quartile 17.75, 3rd quartile 32), 17 (Q1: 13, Q3: 24.25) for c2, 15 (Q1: 12, Q3: 21) for c3, and 17 (Q1: 11.75, Q3: 23) for c4. Albeit not significant, probably due to small samples size and large spread, there was an apparent trend for decreasing missing data from c1 to c2, but the decrease from c2 to c3 and c4 appeared rather marginal (Fig. 1). In c3, for 155 SNPs, missing data were below 10% among all wolf samples ('well-performing loci'), followed by 150 SNPs in c2, 149 SNPs in c4 and 122 SNPs in c1.
Cross-species testing revealed genotype calls in potential prey species. There was no obvious pattern for which taxon had the highest cross-amplification success or under which assay conditions cross-amplification was the lowest. In the absence of wolf DNA, between 22 (c4) and 53 (c1), SNPs produced a genotype in <10% of the tested 22 wolf prey species samples. However, the mean number of successfully amplifying SNPs per sample in prey species was as low as 32%. Therefore, if no wolf DNA was present in a scat sample, contamination from prey leading to spurious multilocus genotypes are sometimes generated in the absence of template DNA, but these genotypes are incomplete and so can easily be detected and removed.

[SECTION] genotyping consistency across dilution series (ii)
Variation in missing data and genotyping error rates across loci, dilution series and genotyping treatments was considerable. Although statistical tests for differences between successive dilutions yielded insignificant outcomes (Fig. 2), there was a trend towards an increase in missing data and genotyping errors in higher dilutions. When comparing genotyping treatments, we also found no evidence for increasing cycle numbers to impact the rate of missing data or genotyping errors (Fig. 2).

[SECTION] genotyping consistency across samples of the same individual (iii)
Among all genotyping treatments, ~10% of the samples had to be discarded according to the 25% missing data criterion (see Methods). The best performing genotyping treatment was found to be c2 (89.5% of samples usable; Table 2). Without considering genotypes of unusable samples (25% missing data criterion) and unusable SNPs (50% SNP criterion, see Methods) among all possible genotypes (38 individuals 9 192 SNPs = 7296 genotypes), ~75% of possible genotypes were called (max. 76.5% for c2). Error rates ranged between 3 and 3.5% (summary and details in Table 2).
Table 1 Amounts of missing data across all SNPs for each treatment. Given are medians with their 1st (Q1) and 3rd (Q3) quartiles. Cf. Fig. 1  Selection of the final genotyping treatment and the core 96 SNP set
Overall, genotyping treatments were quite similar in their performances, but c2 showed slightly lower rates of missing data than c1. Because the differences between the c2, c3 and c4 treatments were marginal, and because c2 required the smallest changes to the original Fluidigm treatment and entailed the lowest risk of creating PCR artefacts, we chose the c2 treatments to compare the full 192 with the final 96 SNP set. Missing data (measure i) in the final 96 SNP set were slightly lower than in the 192 sets (median 15, Q1 12, Q3 19) but showed a strongly reduced spread (Fig. 1). We were able to select SNPs such that all 96 loci had <10% missing data in the wolf samples. Missing data and error rates in the dilution series (measure ii) were accordingly much lower for the final 96 SNP set than in any of the four genotyping treatments of the 192 SNP set (Fig. 2). The final error measures in (measure iii) were consistently lower than in the Fig. 2 Genotyping performance in dilution series (measure ii). For each PCR genotyping treatment c1-c4 as defined in the Methods section and the final set of 96 SNPs (evaluated under treatment c2), we show means of missing data counts across all SNPs with standard deviations in the top panel. The darkest bars are the 5 ng/ lL reference samples; lighter shades of grey represent, from left to right, dilutions of the reference sample to 2, 0.5 and 0.2 ng/lL. In the middle and bottom panels, error rates are displayed between the reference sample and each of the three dilutions. 192 set, while more samples were usable and more genotypes could be called. Dropout errors were only detected in 0.85% of all genotypes and false alleles in 0.21%, resulting in a total error rate of 1.06% in our final 96 SNP set (Table 1). A list of names and assay configuration is available as Supplementary File 'plate_lay-out_96_SNPs.xlsx' in the Dryad data repository.
Statistical power could be primarily tested with genotypes of 13 German wolves. The full set of 96 loci allows discriminating individuals with PID = 6.97 9 10 À20 and PID sib = 1.32 9 10 À10 . A probability of identity of <1 in 10 000 was already reached with a combination of 25 loci for PID and 47 loci for PID sib .

