[SECTION] field sites and sampling methods' description
Carrion flies were captured at two tropical field sites. The Ta€ ı National Park, Côte d'Ivoire (thereafter Ta€ ı), is the largest remnant block of the Upper Guinean rainforest and a typical example of tropical moist forest. It houses a considerable diversity of mammals. Among these, nine nonhuman primate species can be found, many of which have been studied within the framework of a long-term research programme (Boesch & Boesch-Achermann 2001;McGraw et al. 2007). Kirindy Forest, western Madagascar (thereafter Kirindy), is a tropical dry deciduous forest, hosting a number of mammal species. Eight lemur species occur there, which are the focus of a long-term research programme as well (Kappeler & Fichtel 2012). Flies were either caught under mosquito nets protecting dissection areas or at random forest locations using mosquito nets thrown over a bowl containing a piece of meat or bottle-based traps in which a piece of meat had been placed (Fig. S1, Supporting information). In Ta€ ı, all flies were placed in tubes and stored in liquid nitrogen containers immediately after collection. In Kirindy, flies were placed in tubes filled with 96% ethanol and later stored at À20 °C.

[SECTION] dna extraction
Entire flies were placed in FastPrep ® lysing matrix tubes (MP Biomedicals, Illkirch, France) filled with 250 lL phosphate buffer saline and cut several times with sterilized scissors. Tubes were then placed in a FastPrep ® system and agitated three times for fiveseconds. For individual fly analyses, nucleic acids were extracted from 100 lL fly mixture using the GeneMA-TRIX Stool DNA Purification Kit (Roboklon, Berlin, Germany) according to manufacturer's instructions. Except for 30 Ta€ ı flies, which were extracted by a service provider (GenExpress, Berlin, Germany) to provide an independent proof of feasibility, individual extractions were carried out at the Robert Koch Institute. For the fly pool analysis, 10 lL of each selected mixture was added to the pool and the resulting 300 lL were extracted at once using the same kit as for individual extractions. To assess the efficiency of this protocol in removing PCR inhibitors, the first 40 DNA extracts were used in a quantitative inhibition test. In the latter, quantitative PCR assays aimed at amplifying 1 million copies of a short chicken DNA fragment (a portion of the CXCR4 gene) were led in the presence of 5 lL fly DNA extract. The expected number of initial chicken templates was always derived from the experiments, suggesting fly DNA extracts did not exhibit significant inhibitory effect (data not shown).
Nucleic acids were also extracted from 34 tissue samples which had been obtained from Ta€ ı specimens, either from carcasses or darted specimens (bats, carnivores, artiodactyls, primates and rodents) using the DNeasy Blood and Tissue kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) according to manufacturer's instructions.
DNA concentrations were measured for all extracts using a Nanodrop device (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).

[SECTION] mammal-targeting pcr assays for carrion fly screening
Three assays targeting taxa of different breadth (chimpanzee, mammals and vertebrates) were used to screen fly DNA extracts. So as to decrease the sensitivity to classical laboratory contaminants such as human or porcine DNA, PCR were performed in the presence of appropriate blocking primers (Vestheim & Jarman 2008). All assays were optimized using a quantitative PCR approach similar to (Boessenkool et al. 2011), which we applied to a panel of 29 DNA extracts obtained from four humans, four other hominoids, nine cercopithecids, one lorisid, five artiodactyls, two rodents, two bats and one pangolin.
The chimpanzee-specific assay targeted a 114 base pair (bp) long fragment of the mitochondrial 16S gene (16S), using the following primers: 16Sape_f 5′-ATT-CTCCTCCGCATAAGCCT-3′, 16Sape_r 5′-GCCTGTGTT GGGTTAACAG-3′ and 16ape_blkhum 5′-TCCGCAT AAGCCTGCGTCAGATTAAAACAC-spacerC3. The panmammal assay targeted a c. 130 bp fragment of 16S. It was derived from the literature (Boessenkool et al. 2011) but was supplemented with a pig blocking primer: 16Smam1 5′-CGGTTGGGGTGACCTCGGA-3′, 16Smam2 5′-GCTGTTATCCCTAGGGTAACT-3′, 16Smam_blk-hum3 5′-CGGTTGGGGCGACCTCGGAGCAGAACCC-spacerC3 and 16Smam_blkpig 5′-CGGTTGGGGT GACCTCGGAGTACAAAAAAC-spacerC3. PCR were also performed using a variant of this system, to determine success rates for a longer fragment. In that case, 16Smam2 was substituted with 16Smam4 5′-AGATAGAAACCGACCTGGAT-3′, resulting in an amplicon length of about 300 bp. Finally, the pan-vertebrate assay targeted a c. 140-bp fragment of 12S. It was also derived from the literature (Riaz et al. 2011;Shehzad et al. 2012), but supplemented with human and pig blocking primers: 12S_V5f 5′-ACTGGGATTAGAT ACCCC-3′, 12S_V5r 5′-TAGAACAGGCTCC TCTAG-3′, 12S_V5_blkhum 5′-TACCCCACTATGCTTA GCCCTAAACCTCAACAGTTAAATC-spacerC3 and 12S_V5_blkpig 5′-TACCCCACTATGCCTAGCCCTAAA CCCAAATAGTTACAT-spacerC3.
PCRs were performed in a total volume of 25 lL and were started with 200 ng DNA (DNA concentration >40 ng/lL) or 5 lL DNA extract (DNA concentration <40 ng/lL). PCR mixes were set-up so as to allow reducing as much as possible carry over contamination with PCR products. They contained 0.2 lM of each primer, 1 lM of each blocking primer, 200 lM dNTP (with dUTP replacing dTTP), 0.3 U AmpErase ® uracil Nglycosylase (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA), 4 mM MgCl 2 , 1X PCR buffer and 1.25 U Platinum ® Taq polymerase (Invitrogen). Cycling conditions were: 7 min at 45 °C, 10 min at 95 °C, 42 (short and long pan-mammal and ape-specific 16S) or 47 (pan-vertebrate 12S) cycles of 30 s at 95 °C, 30 s at 64 °C (short and long pan-mammal 16S), 57 °C (ape-specific 16S) or 60 °C (pan-vertebrate 12S), 1 min at 72 °C and 10 min at 72 °C. PCR products were visualized on an agarose gel and cleaned up using ExoSAP-IT ® (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA, USA) before being sequenced in both directions using the Sanger method. All chromatograms were examined using Geneious Pro v5.4.3 (http://www.geneious. com/). A detailed depiction of all experiments performed on all flies used in this study is available as Table S1 (Supporting information).
To provide a further control for contamination, the 30 DNA extracts generated externally were also PCR-amplified by the same service provider (GenExpress). All other PCRs were performed at the Robert Koch Institute.

[SECTION] next-generation sequencing of carrion fly dna amplified with pan-mammal pcr systems
The above-mentioned short and long 16S assays were used to generate amplicons for deep sequencing. For this, 200 ng DNA from the 30-fly-pool DNA extract was used to seed reactions. Two different protocols were tested. Two amplicons (one with each primer pair) were generated according to a modified protocol in which normal primers were replaced with fusion primers and normal dNTP were used. Two additional amplicons were generated using the normal screening protocol (i.e. using normal primers and dUTP-containing dNTP). Those were diluted 50 times and used as template for a further five cycle-long PCR using fusion primers and normal dNTP. This last strategy was implemented as it has recently been shown to limit the biases introduced by fusion primer-based amplification (Berry et al. 2011). The four PCR products were then cleaned using MinElute columns (Qiagen) and their DNA concentration assessed using a Qubit ® fluorometer (Invitrogen). Sequencing of individual amplicons was performed on one-eighth of a pico titre plate using a GS FLX platform, according to manufacturer's instructions (Roche Applied Sciences, Penzberg, Germany). Reads were filtered using the PRINSEQ v0.19.2 online interface (Schmieder & Edwards 2011). Reads were discarded if <84 and >109 bp (excluding primers) for the short fragment or <220 and >72 bp (excluding primers) for the long fragment and/or if containing one bp with a quality score below ten or exhibiting an average quality score below 15. After filtering, a minimum of 16 470 reads per PCR product was retained for further analysis. Reads were finally clustered using the online tool cd-hit-est (Li & Godzik 2006;Huang et al. 2010) applying two successive similarity thresholds set-up at 97% and 94%. No noticeable difference between PCR protocols could be identified, but the number of PCR products analysed (2 and 2) was obviously way too low to detect anything else than major shifts. For each PCR product, a FASTQ file comprising all raw reads is archived in DRYAD under doi: 10.5061/dryad.57vg4.

[SECTION] taxonomic assignment of mammal sequences
Taxonomic assignment was performed using BLAST (Altschul et al. 1990). Sequences were compared with NCBI's nonredundant database through an online BLAST search and, for sequences generated with the pan-mammal 16S assays, to our own collection of 16S sequences from Ta€ ı mammals through a local BLAST search.
Even taking into account the sequences determined for this study, very few sequences have been determined from mammals living in Ta€ ı. Actually, <60% of the 232 mammal species reported to be present in the entire Côte d'Ivoire have been examined for 16S diversity (as deduced from a search in NCBI's Nucleotide database of all 232 species names). In most cases, these sequences were not even determined from individuals from Côte d'Ivoire. It was therefore impossible to apply stringent identity level thresholds for species or genus identification, as sometimes done for eDNA analyses (e.g. 100% threshold for species identification in Thomsen et al. ( 2012)). Most species identifications (86%) were performed based on 16S sequences. Among those, 76% exhibited identity levels ! 99% (84% considering identity levels ! 98%). As a comparison, chimpanzees and bonobos (Pan paniscus), which are thought to have diverged from each other 2 million years ago (Bjork et al. 2011), exhibit <97% identity for the same region. In these cases where lower identity levels were observed (typically between 94% and 97%), identification was made on a case-per-case basis combining BLAST information (e.g. second hit exhibiting a marked drop in e-value) and available biological information (e.g. phylogenetic relationships or reported presence in the forest). As a test of the validity of our species assignment, we further applied a clustering approach to short 16S sequences using cd-hit-est and a threshold of 95%. This equated all operational taxonomic units with individual species found through BLAST analysis, except for Myonycteris torquata and Hypsignathus monstrosus (which are recently diverged fruit bat species). We are therefore confident that most assignments are correct and, at the very least, that the extent of mammal diversity presented in this article reflects the mammal diversity captured by our sample of flies. All sequences are available as Appendix S1 (Supporting information).

[SECTION] species accumulation curve estimation
Because always several flies were captured in a trap, the detection of species cannot be considered as independent events. We therefore did not fit curves to species detected in individual flies. Instead, we used the 15 'batches' that contained flies captured in one trap. Batch size ranged from 2 to 35 flies and number of detected species ranged from 0 to 10 (the input file used in further analyses is provided as Table S2, Supporting information). We first tried to fit an asymptotic curve (Eggert et al. 2002) to the cumulative number of species S i detected in n flies
where a and b are the parameters to be estimated and x is the cumulative number of flies. We did this by resampling the data set 1000 times without replacement to derive mean values and confidence limits. However, for many resampled data sets, parameters could not be estimated reliably because the fitting algorithm did not converge. This indicated that the asymptotic trend in the resampled data sets was not consistent enough and thus the data set was too small to derive such statistics. We therefore decided to only fit the curve to the mean values of the bootstrapped data (y = 29.38 9 (1 À exp (À0.00899 9 number of flies))). All analyses were performed in R (R Development Core Team 2008).

[SECTION] carrion fly family/species determination
PCR were prepared as above mentioned using a primer pair widely used to target a c. 700-bp COI fragment in invertebrates (Folmer et al. 1994). All reactions were seeded with 50 ng DNA. Cycling conditions were: 5 min at 95 °C, 35 cycles of 30 s at 95 °C, 30 s at 50 °C, 1 min at 72 °C and 10 min at 72 °C. PCR products were visualized and sequenced as above mentioned. For assignment to Calliphoridae or Sarcophagidae, we used BLAST (Altschul et al. 1990) and a threshold of 94% identity to published sequences from species belonging to one or the other family (intersubfamilies pairwise distance over this fragment ranged between 7% and 15%). Applying this criterion, 95% sequences could be assigned confidently at the family level. A subset of flies could be determined down to the species level, using a threshold of 99% identity to published sequences.

[SECTION] amplifying mammalian dna from carrion flies with known exposure to carrion
We captured 86 flies (under dissection nets) during necropsies of carcasses from five different mammalian species (Table 1). Using ape-specific, pan-mammal and pan-vertebrate PCR systems targeting short (<170 bp) fragments of the mitochondrial 16S and 12S genes, 60/ 86 flies (70%) were shown to contain amplifiable DNA (Table 1). The corresponding sequences were assignable to the expected species for 54/86 flies (63%), with success rates ranging between 33% and 89% per net (Table 1). In addition to the expected species, DNA of other mammals was detected in 11 flies (13%; Table 1).

[SECTION] assessing mammalian biodiversity using dna from randomly collected carrion flies
We then analysed 115 flies without known exposure to carrion, captured at random locations in Ta€ ı (n = 75) and Kirindy (n = 40). Twenty-nine of 75 flies from Ta€ ı (39%) were found positive for mammalian DNA (Table 2). Mitochondrial 16S and 12S sequences from Ta€ ı identified 16 taxa belonging to the orders Artiodactyla, Chiroptera, Eulipotyphla, Primates and Rodentia (Table 2). Twelve of them were identified to the species level, all of which were known to occur in Ta€ ı. The four remaining taxa were two murinae, one hystricid (porcupine) and one crocidurinae (white-toothed shrew), of which several species occur in Ta€ ı (only two hystricids, many more murinae and shrews). A species accumulation curve derived from all flies captured in Ta€ ı (including flies captured under nets; n = 161) evidenced that increasing sampling size would have resulted in detecting additional mammal species (the small size of the sampling prevented any further prediction; Fig. 1). Seventeen of 40 flies from Kirindy (42%) were found positive for mammalian DNA. Four mammal taxa belonging to the orders Afrosoricidae, Carnivora and Primates were identified; three of them at the species level (Table 2). All were known Malagasy endemics. Two bird species, one in Ta€ ı and one in Kirindy, were also detected with the pan-vertebrate PCR system targeting 12S (Table 2). One amphibian species was detected in Ta€ ı using the pan-mammal PCR system targeting 16S (Table 2). Seven flies (five in Ta€ ı and two in Kirindy) contained DNA from multiple mammal/vertebrate taxa. *Where species identification was not possible, higher taxa to which DNA sequences could be related are shown. Number of flies found positive for a given taxon is given in brackets. †Co-detection with another mammal species. ‡These duiker DNA sequences could not be attributed to species but the observed differences (4/107 bp; 12S fragment) were considered incompatible with them belonging to different individuals of a single species. See also Table S3 (Supporting information).

[SECTION] targeting longer dna fragments
We retested 150 flies using a modified pan-mammal 16S assay, with an amplicon length of 300 bp. Success rates did not change dramatically when compared with results obtained with short fragments: 52/59 flies captured under dissection nets (88%) and 23/91 randomly collected flies (25%) were positive for mammalian DNA (vs. 63% and 40% with short fragments).
Assessing pooling as a high-throughput strategy
We pooled and extracted at once remnants of 30 flies already analysed individually. Two short and two long 16S amplicons were generated from the extract using fusion primers and directly sequenced on a 454 GS FLX. This allowed for the identification of, respectively, 8/12 (first short PCR product), 10/12 (second), 8/9 (first long PCR product) and 8/9 (second) of the taxa identified through individual analyses and Sanger's sequencing (Table 3). A single taxon was detected only through individual sequencing whereas four others were only detected through the pooled fly NGS approach (Table 3).

[SECTION] identifying suitable carrion fly species
Finally, to determine the fly species captured and analysed, we generated COI sequences from 181 flies. In both Ta€ ı and Kirindy, blow flies (family Calliphoridae) were abundant, accounting for over 90% of captured individuals and being found in all traps. A minimum of three species were identified in Ta€ ı (blow fly species identification was not possible for Kirindy flies): Chrysomya inclinata (60 individuals captured in 6 traps), Chrysomya putoria (52 in 14 traps) and Chrysomya albiceps (13 in six traps). Flesh flies (family Sarcophagidae) accounted for the remaining 10% of individuals and were only found in 9/21 traps. A minimum of one species was identified in Ta€ ı (Sarcophaga africana, three in two traps) and in Kirindy (Sarcophaga tibialis, two in two traps In a comparative perspective, an important question is that of invertebrate feeding strategies, which might introduce biases in the mammal spectrum detected. This also applies to carrion flies species, which have sometimes been reported to exhibit host preferences (Norris 1965). In spite of a relatively moderate sample size, our data do not indicate a strong sampling bias related to either average body size or forest strata use of the host species. Both small (<0.1 kg) and large (up to 235 kg) as well as terrestrial and arboreal mammals were identified (Table S3, Supporting information). This might contrast with other invertebrates presenting well-known host preferences (e.g. mosquitoes; Lyimo & Ferguson 2009). It is also worth noting that tsetse flybased studies have not yet detected small-bodied mammals (Konnai et al. 2008;Muturi et al. 2011) and that the presence of only terrestrial mammals was revealed through leeches (Schnell et al. 2012). Although further work is needed to provide a proper comparison, it may be that carrion flies feed on a larger spectrum of mammals than blood-sucking invertebrates.
In the end, it is, however, clear that blow flies, haematophagous insects and leeches should be considered as parts of the same vertebrate sampler toolbox, from which one tool will occasionally supersede the others, depending on the ecosystem investigated or the conceived application. For example, while leeches have a much more restricted distribution than blow flies, it can be expected that they will contain more mammal DNA, for longer periods of time than blow flies, which points at them as ideal candidates for DNA-demanding applications (Schnell et al. 2012).
Carrion fly-derived DNA might be used to address a number of questions related to mammal biodiversity. We show here an example of high-throughput mammal biodiversity assessment using NGS of fly pool DNA. Our experiment provides a picture of mammalian biodiversity that matches closely the one obtained using individual-based methods. This suggests that no strong bias arose from the competition between different species' DNA, as sometimes observed in bacterial metagenomics (Hong et al. 2009). Hence, NGS from fly pools represents a very effective sequencing strategy in terms of laboratory costs and sample usage. The fact that amphibian and bird sequences were also detected suggests that similar strategies may be developed to assess the biodiversity of other animal groups. Nonmammal taxa, however, only formed a small fraction of the vertebrate sequences found here, even when a panvertebrate system was used, so this aspect warrants more investigation. assessment and monitoring of mammalian biodiversity. We are therefore convinced that this new tool will quickly come into use and contribute to the advancement of the DNA-based evaluation of the diversity of wild mammals and other organisms.

