[SECTION] study area
We sampled an area that encompassed most of the known current distributional range of the black bear Ursus americanus in northeastern Mexico (Fig. 1). The 6 sampling sites were located in the southeastern highlands of the states of Coahuila and Nuevo León, and also in the northeastern part of Coahuila (Sierra del Burro and Sierra del Carmen). Overall, the habitat in the desert areas is characterized by abundant xero-   (Muldavin 2002). These areas are considered unsuitable habitat for black bear populations (Onorato et al. 2007).
The northeastern part of Coahuila consists principally of an elevated limestone plateau that is an extension of the northern Chisos Mountains in Big Bend National Park of Texas. The 2 mountain areas are part of the same system of uplifts, but they are separated by the Rio Grande valley and are composed of different types of rock (Miller 1955). Both sampling sites are located in the Chihuahuan Desert and are within the protected areas of the Maderas del Carmen Biosphere Reserve, which include several private properties and communal agricultural lands ('ejidos'). Even though this is a protected area with suitable habitat and with abundant food resources for black bears, the illegal extraction of stony material and xeric/timber products, hunting, and grazing continue to pose problems (Onorato et al. 2007).
The southeastern part of Coahuila and Nuevo León is located in the northeastern mountain range of the Sierra Madre Oriental. Our sampling sites were located at some of the highest points in the mountain ranges (Picachos and Santa Catarina), where pine-oak is the predominant vegetation. Land use around these sites includes livestock production, wildlife-based recreation, grazing areas, and heavily populated/industrial zones (i.e. the urban areas of Monterrey and Saltillo).

[SECTION] sample collection
Because direct sighting of, and sampling from, wild black bears is very difficult, we used non-invasive fecal and hair sampling as a source of DNA. Our sampling was designed to obtain fecal and hair samples from as many different individuals as possible in the area in an effort to maximize complete sampling of the populations in the different areas so as to assess levels of genetic diversity and structure. Between 2008 and 2012, we surveyed transects throughout the 6 different locations, walking a maximum distance of 10 km, searching for fecal material and placing 10 baited barbed wire hair traps at intervals of 1 km (Woods et al. 1999). Transects were surveyed during dry field seasons (February to May) in the early morning to avoid negative effects of the weather on the feces (Hájková et al. 2006). In the dry season of each of the 5 years of the study period we checked for scats and set hair snags. Fresh fecal samples were placed in Falcon tubes with silica gel and transported to the laboratory for analysis. Black bears are the only large carnivore present in the area and therefore we did not need to identify fecal samples to species using a genetic marker because visual identification and size of feces were conclusive for species identification. We collected hair samples mainly from wire hair traps, but we also looked for evidence of hair on fences with evident signs of scratching posts. We used hair traps only once in each site during the 5 yr period because of the higher cost and time effort required to maintain and sample them. We assumed that every clump of hair collected in each wire trap belonged to a single individual because traps were carefully monitored and checked daily during the sampling period.

[SECTION] laboratory procedure
Whole genomic DNA was extracted from fecal samples using the QIAamp DNA Stool Mini Kit and from tissue using the DNeasy Tissue and Blood Kit (Qiagen) in a separate room from PCR products (Eggert et al. 2005). For each hair trap, 5 to 10 hairs with evident roots were incubated overnight with Proteinase K. We extracted hair DNA by applying the universal salt-extraction protocol (Aljanabi & Martínez 1997). We optimized DNA amplification following the standard protocol suggested by Lampa et al. (2008). Quality of DNA was assessed by electrophoresis on 1% agarose gels in combination with molecular weight standards.
Ten nuclear microsatellite loci specifically designed for U. americanus (UamA2, UamA107, UamB8, UamB103, UamB125, UamD11, UamD102, UamD103, UamD113, UamD116, Meredith et al. 2009), were amplified via PCR in a 20 µl reaction volume using approximately 10 ng µl -1 of target DNA (fecal/hair), 1× buffer, 0.4 mM dNTPs, 0.8 µM forward primer labeled with FAM fluorescence (Invitrogen), 0.8 µM reverse primer (Invitrogen), 2 to 3.75 mM MgCl 2 , and 2 U µl -1 of Taq DNA polymerase (Promega). We used an Applied Biosystems 2720 Thermal Cycler under the following conditions: 94°C for 180 s, followed by 35 cycles at 94°C for 60 s, annealing temperature (as reported by Meredith et al. 2009 for each primer) for 30 s, and 72°C for 30 s; followed by 240 s at 72°C and a final step of 4°C. PCR products were confirmed by electrophoresis in 1.5% agarose gels stained with ethidium bromide using a 100 bp ladder and a negative control. The products were dried (SpeedVac REC10.10.-RCT0; Jouan) and genotyped on an ABI Prism 3100 sequencer (Applied Biosystems).
We carried out all of the pre-PCR procedures in sterile conditions in a separate room using aerosol barrier tips to minimize cross-contamination. Negative controls were included in all extractions and PCR to detect the presence of any exogenous DNA or reagent contamination. To account for error rates such as false alleles (FAs) and allelic dropout (ADO), we followed a modified multi-tube approach of Taberlet et al. (1996) and repeated each PCR 3 times for microsatellite analysis. In order to obtain a final score, we used the most parsimonious score based on the consensus of the 3 scores. We scored homozygotes only when the same allele was detected 3 times and heterozygotes when the same 2 alleles were detected in 2 runs, even if the third run only detected 1 of the 2 alleles. We only included samples that had genotypes that amplified 3 times for all 10 loci.

[SECTION] data analyses
The number of alleles (NA), expected heterozygosity (H e ), and observed heterozygosity (H o ) per locus per population was estimated according to Nei (1987), as implemented in the programs GENEPOP v. 4.0 (Raymond & Rousset 1995) and ARLEQUIN v. 3.0 (Excoffier et al. 1992). We estimated allelic richness and private allele richness with correction for sample size through rarefaction using the software HP-RARE (Kalinowski 2005). We performed an exact test for Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE) per locus using a Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) procedure with 10 000 dememorization steps, and estimated deviations from HWE for each population through the inbreeding coefficient F IS (Weir & Cockerham 1984), as well as linkage disequilibrium using the program GENEPOP v. 4.0 (Raymond & Rousset 1995), with Bonferroni correction (Rice 1989) applied for multiple comparisons. HWE states that allele and genotype frequencies will remain constant among generations in the absence of evolutionary forces.
Because HWE predicts equilibrium genotype proportions, F IS accounts for the deviation from this equilibrium in terms of inbreeding influence. We used MICROCHECKER v. 2.2.3 (Brookfield 1996, Van Oosterhout et al. 2004) to detect loci containing errors due to scoring or stuttering. We calculated the cumulative P ID (probability of identity) and P ID-sibs (identity for sibling or probability of identity among siblings) value (Waits et al. 2001) using GEMINI (Valière et al. 2002). Cumulative P ID values provide a measure of the power of our panel of selected markers to distinguish individuals.
Pairwise R ST (Holsinger & Weir 2009) was estimated using ARLEQUIN v. 3.0 (Excoffier et al. 2005) with the default values provided by the program and 100 iterations to obtain significance values. The R ST model was used for our microsatellite data because its mathematical procedure assumes the stepwise mutation process that is a better parameter in microsatellite loci differentiation (Hardy et al. 2003). Isolation by distance was tested through a Mantel test using 2000 permutations with the program FSTAT v. 2.9.3 (Goudet 2001), using the multiple regressions and the linear geographic distances between populations.
We used analysis of molecular variance (AMOVA) in ARLEQUIN v. 3.0 (Excoffier et al. 2005), with 1000 repetitions and confidence intervals based on 20 000 repetitions to assess the proportion of variation found between individuals within populations, followed by intra-population variation. The software STRUC-TURE v. 2.2 (Pritchard et al. 2000) was used to assess genetic structure. STRUCTURE employs a modelbased Bayesian analysis to cluster groups, performed as an assignment test. Previous runs were analyzed in order to determine the number of burn-in chains and MCMC that maximize the result's posterior likelihood. To determine the optimal number of clusters (K ) we used the ΔK test proposed by Evanno et al. (2005) which is based on the log likelihood obtained for each K. We used the program BAPS v. 3.1 (Corander et al. 2003) to estimate the posterior probabilities for the number of populations, the proportion of individuals among the inferred populations, and the relative frequency of alleles.
To see if we could detect signatures of a population bottleneck, we used the program BOTTLENECK (Piry et al. 1999), which tests for heterozygote excess as compared with that expected under mutationdrift equilibrium. First, we used a qualitative approach in the form of an allele frequency distribution test. If any deviation is observed from the normal L-shaped allele frequency distribution, a bottleneck may be suspected. We then used a quantitative approach based on the principle that the allelic diversity in a population decreases faster than heterozygosity after passing through a bottleneck, resulting in a relative excess of heterozygotes (Cornuet & Luikart 1996). The significance of observed deviations was determined by a 2-tailed Wilcoxon signed-rank test (Luikart & Cornuet 1998), under the 2-phase mutation (TPM) model, with 30% of mutations explained by the step-wise mutation model (SMM) because it has been suggested to be the most suitable for microsatellites (Luikart & Cornuet 1998).

