[SECTION] (no title)
The International Union for Conservation of Nature's Red List has become an increasingly powerful tool for conservation planning, management, monitoring, and decision making ( Rodrigues et al. 2006 ). At a regional level, a species can be classified as Regionally Extinct (RE) " when there is no reasonable doubt that the last individual potentially capable of reproduction within the region has died or disappeared from the region or, in the case of a former visiting taxon, individuals no longer visit the region. This will depend on how much effort has been devoted to searches for the taxon, which in turn will vary, both with organism and region " . One could be fairly confident in saying that a large mammal is RE if it has not been observed over the last few decades; however, this might be rather difficult with small elusive mammals such as bats. Further difficulties arise when the species of interest is morphologically very similar to another more common species ( Boston et al. 2010, Puechmaille et al. 2012 ).
Non-invasive genetic techniques, using biological material left behind by animals as a source of DNA, are becoming routinely used in conservation biology and monitoring programs, particularly for threatened and protected species ( Luikart et al. 2010 ). The DNA obtained can be used to identify the species from which the sample originated, most commonly through sequencing of a short fragment of mitochondrial DNA ( Kohn and Wayne 1997 ). Potential difficulties associated with non-invasive genetics are the low quality and/or quantity of DNA recovered and the potential presence of PCR inhibitors ( Taberlet et al. 1999 ). Nevertheless, specific improvements in the techniques to extract and amplify DNA from non-invasive genetics have been developed to overcome these difficulties in a diverse range of taxonomic groups (e.g., Eggert et al. 2005, Puechmaille et al. 2007 ).
Mehely ' s horseshoe bat, Rhinolophus mehelyi Matschie 1901, is a medium-sized rhinolophid with a discontinuous distribution from North Africa (Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, Libya, and Egypt) and southern Europe (Iberia, Sardinia, Sicily, and the Balkans) through Asia Minor, Anatolia, to Transcaucasia and Iran. The species is globally classified as " vulnerable " but is thought to have gone extinct in north-eastern Spain, Mallorca, Croatia, and Israel ( Flaquer et al. 2010 , Hamidovi ć pers. com., Levin pers. com.) and is near extinction in France, Romania, and Sicily ( Rombaut andHaquart 2002 , Dragu andBorissov 2011 , Mucedda pers. com.). Most observations in France are from the period 1908 -1965, during which this species was regularly observed at several sites in the Gard, H é rault, and Bouches-du-Rh ô ne d é partements in southern France ( Mottaz 1908, Hugues 1914, 1936, Gallocher 1958, K ö nig and K ö nig 1961, Jeantet and Gory 1997 , Jeantet pers. com.) and only once in Corsica ( Kahmann and Goerner 1956 ). Species identifications have been verified by examinations of voucher specimens previously collected in southern France and deposited in the Natural History Museum in Paris ( Rode 1939 , Masson andBesson 1988 , Puechmaille pers. obs.), the Natural History Museum of N î mes (Jeantet pers. com.), the Staatliches Museum fur Naturkunde Stuttgart ( K ö nig and K ö nig 1961 ), the Natural History Museum in Geneva ( Miller 1912 , Strinati andAellen 1958 ), and the Zoological Museum in Berlin (Lange pers. com.). In the last decade, sightings of hibernating bats similar to R. mehelyi have been reported, especially in the H é rault and Gard D é partements in southern France ( Ruffray 2011 , M é dard and Derivaz pers. com.). Nevertheless, R. mehelyi is morphologically very similar to Rhinolophus euryale Blasius, 1853, another medium-sized horseshoe bat regularly observed in these regions. These two species could easily be confused (discussed in detail in Puechmaille et al. 2012 ), especially when the animals are only observed from a distance, as during the hibernation period, when the bats should not be disturbed.
Here we report on a new strategy to identify bat species in hibernation through the genetic analysis of guano collected underneath the bats of interest. Pre vious studies have shown that it is possible to extract goodquality DNA from bat guano ( Vege and McCracken 2001, Zinck et al. 2004, Puechmaille et al. 2005, 2007, Puechmaille and Petit 2007 ), although it has never been tested with guano collected at hibernation sites. In this study, we used non-invasive genetics to confirm the species of a group of hibernating bats (Gardon gorges, Gard department, France) that were suspected to be Rhinolophus mehelyi based on visual observation.
On the 20th of February 2008, a plastic sheet covered with newspaper was placed in a cave underneath a group of 18 hibernating medium-sized Rhinolophus suspected to be Rhinolophus mehelyi based on visual identification. No droppings were present on the first visit (22nd February) 2 days later, whereas six droppings were collected on the second visit (27th February) 5 days later. Each dropping was individually placed in a tube with silica gel to absorb humidity and hence preserve DNA ( Puechmaille et al. 2007 ). Droppings were then sent to the laboratory where only non-invasive DNA samples are analyzed, hence minimizing potential contamination problems. For comparison, droppings collected in a cloth holding bag from captured Spanish R. mehelyi (colony Villuercas in Salsamendi et al. 2008 ) were also included. A total of eight droppings from France (n = 6) and Spain (n = 2) were extracted following the protocol detailed in Puechmaille et al. (2007) . Given that long DNA fragments have been amplified from guano ( Boston et al. 2012, Goodman et al. 2012, Ruedi et al. 2012, Dool et al. 2013 ), we amplified the full cytochrome b and partial D-loop in two overlapping fragments. The first fragment (885 bp) was amplified using primers mtDNA-R3-F and mtDNA-F3-R, and the second fragment (1025 bp) using primers mtDNA-R2-F and mtDNA-F2-R ( Puechmaille et al. 2011 ). PCR mix and PCR conditions were as described in Thong et al. (2012) . The amplified PCR products were then purified and directly sequenced by Macrogen Inc. (Seoul, South Korea) using the same primers as mentioned above. The forward and reverse sequences per fragment were edited and assembled for each individual using the program CodonCode Aligner 4.0.1 (CodonCode Corporation, Dedham, MA, USA).
Of the six French samples extracted, two did not amplify whereas four amplified for both fragments. We combined these six sequences obtained (GenBank accession number KF031265 -KF031268) with another five sequences retrieved from GenBank and belonging to Rhinolophus mehelyi (n = 1), R. euryale (n = 3), and R. ferrumequinum (n = 1, used as the outgroup) to perform a maximum likelihood tree reconstruction in PAUP* ( Swofford 2003 ) using HKY models as selected by the hierarchical likelihood ratio test in Modeltest 3.7 ( Posada and Crandall 1998 ).
The phylogenetic reconstruction clearly indicated the presence of two strongly supported clades (bootstrap supports of 100%), which could be identified as being Rhinolophus euryale and R. mehelyi based on the sequences of known identity from GenBank and the Spanish R. mehelyi samples ( Figure 1 ). Whereas the two non-invasive samples from Spain grouped with R. mehelyi , all the French sequences from the hibernation site grouped with R. euryale , and hence belong to this latter species.
These results highlight the limitations of visual identification of hibernating bats and advocate for the use of non-invasive genetics to confirm species identity for rare bats, especially for those that are difficult to identify on the basis of morphological criteria. Recently, Puechmaille et al. (2012) reviewed morphological criteria to differentiate both species and showed that some of these criteria vary geographically, further complicating the correct identification of these species. Although our study revealed unambiguously that the suspected animals in the gorges du Gardon were Rhinolophus euryale and not R. mehelyi ; these results on their own are not enough to confirm that the species is extinct in France. Further field surveys combined with non-invasive genetic analyses are urgently needed to clarify the status of the species in the sites where the species was present until the 1960s ( Jeantet andGory 1997 , Gory andJeantet 1999 ).
In terms of climatic conditions, hibernating sites generally have low temperatures and high humidity ( Webb et al. 1996, Vi š ň ovsk á et al. 2006 ). DNA degradation decreases at low temperatures but increases at higher humidity; therefore, equipment should be placed in the driest locations available where the subject bats are present. We also recommend that samples only a few days old should be preferentially collected. Previous work has demonstrated that ca. 90% of samples kept in dry conditions provide adequate quality and amount of DNA for species identification ( Puechmaille et al. 2007, Boston et al. 2012 ). In the present study, we amplified large fragments ( > 800 bp) to maximize the amount of information obtained from the sequences to gain information on population differentiation between the French and Spanish samples. If species identification is the only target, shorter fragments allowing species discrimination should be used (usually ca. 100 -200 bp), which would likely increase amplification success ( Broquet et al. 2007 ). DNA extraction protocols that efficiently remove PCR inhibitors should preferentially be used ( Puechmaille et al. 2007 ); however, if some inhibitors remain after extraction, more diluted DNA extracts should be used and/or amplified along with bovine serum albumin that binds to inhibitors during the PCR. As seen with the group of hibernating bats in the Gardon gorges, bats are unlikely to produce large numbers of droppings during their hibernation period but might produce a few droppings when they wake up from torpor, allowing their genetic identification based on mitochondrial DNA. Identification to the species level might not be possible if two species cannot be differentiated using mitochondrial DNA, either because of current or past hybridization (e.g., Myotis myotis/Myotis blythii ; Berthier et al. 2006 ). In such situations, species identification could be obtained through microsatellite genotyping using reference species datasets.
Studies based on droppings have demonstrated that individuals could be identified by their unique genetic multilocus genotype ( Puechmaille et al. 2007 , Puechmaille andPetit 2007 ) and although here we only used mitochondrial DNA, it should be possible to also amplify nuclear DNA from these droppings from hibernation sites. DNA fingerprints obtained at hibernation sites could then be compared with fingerprints obtained at maternity colonies and would allow the identification of connections between maternity colonies and hibernation sites, still a grand challenge in bat biology. These techniques, although probably very costly if used at large scale ( Boston et al. 2012 ), could nevertheless be used for smaller sample sizes to inform movements of rare and endangered species that cannot be marked with more conventional techniques (e.g., ringing or passive integrated transponder tagging). The genetic information obtained non-invasively can also be used to investigate the fidelity of individuals to a particular site or survival rates if the sampling is carried out in multiple years. Additionally, these data can also inform about population structure and genetic diversity.
With the increasing legal requirement of countries to monitor and preserve their biodiversity, new methods such as non-invasive genetic tools presented herein are necessary to study species, particularly those critically endangered and elusive.

