[SECTION] (no title)
The distribution of coyotes (Canis latrans) has expanded during the past 2 centuries to include all of North America except for the far northeastern regions of Canada (Bekoff and Gese 2003). Coyotes colonized areas east of the Mississippi River in the United States along a northern and a southern front. The northern front moved across the Great Lakes region and into northeastern states, while the southern front moved across the southeastern United States (Moore andParker 1992, Parker 1995), perhaps aided by human translocation (Hill et al. 1987). Since then, coyotes have rapidly increased in number throughout the southeastern United States (Kilgo et al. 2010).
Coyotes are medium-sized, generalist predators with a broad diet. In areas where large canids or felids are absent, coyotes may suppress populations of smaller carnivores, thereby increasing abundance and diversity of songbirds and rodents (Levi and Wilmers 2012). Evidence also suggests coyotes are responsible for the majority of neonatal whitetailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus) mortality in the Southeast (Saalfeld and Ditchkoff 2007, Jackson 2011, Kilgo et al. 2012, McCoy et al. 2013, Chitwood et al. 2015, Nelson et al. 2015). Given the ability of coyotes to affect a wide variety of taxa including white-tailed deer, the region's most pursued and economically important game species (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service 2011), both managers and researchers are interested in improving understanding of coyote ecology to inform management decisions.
Estimating abundance and demographic parameters is often a first and necessary step in adapting wildlifemanagement strategies following colonization by a new species (Bozarth et al. 2015). To account for the elusive nature of coyotes, several researchers have used DNA collected from coyote scats deposited along roads and trails to noninvasively mark and recapture individuals, allowing for estimation of abundance or other parameters of interest. This technique was used to estimate coyote abundance in the states of Virginia (Bozarth et al. 2015, Morin et al. 2016), California (Kohn et al. 1999, Fedriani et al. 2001), New York (Kays et al. 2008), and Alaska, USA (Prugh et al. 2005).
However, fecal genotyping is not without limitations. Fecal samples usually contain small quantities of low-quality DNA, which may result in failure to obtain a PCR product for subsequent analysis; thereby, decreasing the effective sample size or leading to genotyping errors (Taberlet et al. 1999). Genotyping errors can bias abundance estimates by leading to either creation of false alleles or an inability to distinguish distinct individuals (Taberlet et al. 1996, Mills et al. 2000, Waits and Leberg 2000, Marucco et al. 2011). Hence, much effort has been devoted to understanding how factors such as sample age and environmental conditions affect DNA degradation and, thus, sample quality (Farrell et al. 2000, Nsubuga et al. 2004, Piggott 2004, Murphy et al. 2007, Santini et al. 2007, Lonsinger et al. 2015). In general, genotyping success is greater when only the freshest scats are sampled during cooler, drier periods, or in areas with cold, xeric climates (Farrell et al. 2000, Lucchini et al. 2002, Nsubuga et al. 2004, Piggott 2004, Murphy et al. 2007, Santini et al. 2007).
Researchers can reduce sample age by increasing sampling frequency or sampling only those scats subjectively evaluated as fresh. However, collecting scats during cool, dry periods is difficult in the humid subtropical climate of the Southeast where interest in estimating coyote abundance is high because of their relatively recent colonization. Therefore, our objective was to assess the feasibility of using fecal genotyping for this purpose in the Southeast and areas with similar climates to provide researchers and managers with guidelines for making decisions regarding use of the technique prior to its implementation. We collected coyote scats for approximately 2 years on 2 sites in central Georgia, USA, and quantified seasonal and comprehensive genotyping success, as well as the effect of sampling effort on precision of closed population abundance estimates. We predicted our overall success rates would be lower than those for colder or more xeric climates, but would be greatest during autumn, because this season on our study areas most closely resembles optimal conditions for preservation of fecal DNA.

[SECTION] study area
We conducted research on portions of B.F. Grant (BFG) and Cedar Creek (CC) wildlife management areas in Putnam County, Georgia (Fig. 1). These areas were separated by approximately 8 km at their closest point. The terrain was gently rolling and elevation ranged from 120 m to 180 m. B. F. Grant was owned by the University of Georgia and CC was part of the Oconee National Forest. Central Georgia had a humid, subtropical climate. During summer, high temperatures averaged approximately 328 C and overnight lows ranged from 168 to 218 C. During winter, high temperatures ranged from 108 to 168 C, with lows averaging approximately 28 C. Temperatures during spring and autumn were more variable. However, the first frost usually occurred in mid-November and the last frost was typically in mid-to late-March. Annual rainfall amounts ranged from 114 cm to 127 cm. The driest months were typically September and October and the wettest month was March (National Weather Service 2015).

[SECTION] methods scat collection and genetic analysis
We collected putative coyote scats approximately weekly on each study area during February 2010-April 2012 along permanently identified survey routes that consisted of unpaved roads and trails. Survey routes totaled 28 km on BFG and 20 km on CC and traversed blocks of approximately 2,000 ha within the interior of each site. We used published criteria of size, shape, contents, and odor to subjectively differentiate coyote scats from those deposited by other species (Murie 1974). Because the quality of DNA was significantly lower in wolf (C. lupus) scats >3 days old, we preserved samples of only those scats estimated to be 3 days old (based on moisture content and degree of decomposition) for genetic confirmation of species of origin and microsatellite genotyping for individual coyote identification (Santini et al. 2007). We collected approximately 3 mL (i.e., size of a small grape) of fecal matter from the outside edges of each scat in the field and placed the sample into a 15-mL polystyrene centrifuge tube filled with 9 mL of 95% EtOH (Stenglein et al. 2010). We labeled each tube with a unique identification number and the date of collection. The portion of each scat remaining after subsampling was removed from the survey route. We sent preserved scats from Georgia to the University of California Davis Veterinary Genetics Laboratory for analysis. We extracted DNA from feces using the Qiagen QiaAmp Stool Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA). We used mitochondrial sequencing to determine species using the cytochrome b fragment amplified by primers RF14724 and RF15149 (Perrine et al. 2007), followed by BLAST search in GenBank. Specifically, we performed polymerase chain reactions (PCRs) in 25-mL total volumes consisting of 2 mL of DNA extract, 2.5 mL of 10Â PCR buffer, 2.0 mL of 10 mM dNTPs, 1.5 mL of 25 mM MgCl2, 1 mL each of 10 mM forward and reverse primers, 0.3 mL of 5 U/mL Taq and water to make up the remainder of the volume. The PCR thermal profile was 948 C for 3 min; 45 cycles of 948 C for 30 s, 508 C for 30 s, and 728 C for 45 s; followed by a 10-min extension at 728 C. We sequenced each product from the forward primer using ABI Big Dye terminator sequencing reagents following manufacturer's guidelines and sequenced products on an ABI 3730 capillary sequencer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). Our criterion for accepting species-level matches during BLAST search was >98% homology to a single species. We used 12 microsatellites and a sex marker (based on X and Y chromosome paralogs of the amelogenin gene) genotyped in 2 multiplex reactions to determine individual genotypes and genetic sex (An et al. 2010). We fluorescently labeled forward primers (6FAM, VIC, NED, PET; Applied Biosystems) and performed reactions as described previously by An et al. ( 2010) except that we organized loci into multiplexes as follows: multiplex 1 incorporated AHTh171, CPH18, CXX-468, CXX-602, REN54P11, and the sex marker; multiplex 2 incorporated AHT137, AHT142, CXX-279, CXX-374, INU055, REN162C04, and REN169O18. We conducted PCRs using the Qiagen multiplex kit according to the manufacturer's recommended protocols (including Q-solution). We electrophoresed PCR products on an ABI 3730 capillary sequencer (Applied Biosystems) and scored alleles relative to an internal size standard, Genescan 500 LIZ (Applied Biosystems), using STRand software (Toonen and Hughes 2001). We replicated all fecal genotypes at least twice. We considered high-quality samples (i.e., all loci represented in !1 replicate and !7 loci amplified in the other) complete. By using 2 independent genotypes, the probability of a false homozygote due to 2 dropouts of the same allele was small (one-half the square of the probability of a single allelic dropout, approx. 4%), but not negligible. Therefore, rather than assume 100% accuracy of final genotypes (as is standard in studies that use smaller numbers of loci; e.g., 6), our approach was to accommodate genotyping error by using a sufficient number of loci of sufficient polymorphism to detect erroneous genotype mismatches probabilistically with high confidence (see Lounsberry et al. 2015 for details). Nevertheless, we replicated genotypes falling below the threshold of 7 amplified loci up to 5 additional times (3-7 total replicates) and included only those with no missing loci in further analyses (Lounsberry et al. 2015). We divided the number of dropouts by the number of successful replicates for each heterozygous locus (as determined from consensus genotypes) to calculate the allelic dropout rate. We used GenAlEx 6.5 (Peakall andSmouse 2006, 2012) to calculate the probability of individual identity and probability of identity for siblings for each locus and increasing combinations of the 12 loci (Waits et al. 2001). We used the AlleleMatch package in R to perform a pairwise genotypematching analysis resulting in creation of composite genotypes for unique individuals (Galpern et al. 2012, R Core Team 2014).

[SECTION] data analysis
Following genotyping, we analyzed these data to determine the probability of successfully genotyping scats during each season and explore the effects of varying sampling effort on precision of abundance estimates. We defined seasons as spring (Mar-May), summer (Jun-Aug), autumn (Sep-Nov), and winter (Dec-Feb). We used logistic regression in Program R to determine the probability of a scat yielding a consensus genotype within each season (R Core Team 2014). First, we constructed the model with season as the explanatory variable with the binary response of success as the response variable. We considered parameter estimates for seasons with 95% confidence intervals not overlapping zero informative. We also used the predict function with the model to calculate the estimated probability of genotyping success and associated 95% confidence limits for each season. Because these estimates were on the logit scale, we back-transformed the predicted values and confidence limits into probabilities for graphing and interpretation. We examined sensitivity of coyote abundance estimate precision (i.e., coeff. of variation [CV]) to reduced sampling effort by sequentially reducing the full 2010 capture-mark-recapture data set for the BFG study area and examining changes in CV relative to the estimate from the full data set. The full 2010 BFG data set consisted of 39 survey occasions (i.e., weeks) pooled into 3 biologically relevant seasons. We treated each of the 3 seasons as a single sampling occasion for closed-population abundance estimation purposes. We defined seasons as breeding (Jan-Apr), denning and pup-rearing (May-Jul), and dispersal (Aug-Dec). We treated multiple encounters of the same animal during the same season (i.e., detected in !1 week) as a single encounter. We subsampled the 39-occasion data set by randomly selecting a subset of occasions to retain in the reduced data set. We selected subsets of 15-35 sampling occasions, at 5 occasion intervals (i.e., 15, 20, etc.) and replicated the random selection process 100 times for each subsampling level. We used Program MARK (version 6.0; White and Burnham 1999) and the R package RMark (Laake 2013) to fit 3 closedpopulation capture-mark-recapture models to the full data set and each replicate data set for each subsampling level. The 3 models differed in how detection probability (p) was modeled (i.e., constant p over time, time-specific p, and constant p with additive behavioral effect). We derived a model-averaged abundance estimate and associated SE and CV for all data sets to account for model selection uncertainty (Burnham and Anderson 2003), and calculated the median of estimated CV values across all replicates within each subsampling level to assess changes in expected estimator precision associated with different survey effort levels.

