[SECTION] (no title)
Understanding the ecological and biological drivers affecting estimates of detection probability in capture-recapture population studies is important for developing efficient sampling designs (Boulanger et al. 2004a(Boulanger et al. , 2004b;;Ebert et al. 2010). Noninvasive sampling methods (e.g., hair traps, remote cameras, and scat collection) are commonly used for monitoring rare or elusive species (Eggert et al. 2003;Garshelis 2006;Sollmann et al. 2013). Nonetheless, low precision and bias caused by individual variation in detection probability and small sample size may limit the efficacy of these methods to estimate population abundance parameters (Garshelis and Noyce 2006;Ebert et al. 2010). Although many population estimators account for individual variation in detection (Otis et al. 1978;Huggins 1991;Royle et al. 2014), improving sampling designs to increase sample size relies on knowledge of specific ecological and behavioral differences within populations (Boulanger et al. 2004a).
The spacing of traps and extent of trap coverage may favor detection of certain demographic classes (Sollmann et al. 2012;Tobler and Powell 2013) and the timing or duration of sampling may introduce temporal variation in detection (Poole et al. 2001;Larrucea et al. 2006;Wegan et al. 2012). Moreover, sampling low-density populations or elusive species may yield insufficient sample size to correct during analysis for unequal detection. Since characteristics of individuals (e.g., size, age, behavior, etc.) in a sampled population are typically unattainable in noninvasive surveys, identifying possible sources of variation in capture probability in the field is challenging, but important for improving efficacy of noninvasive sampling designs (Marucco et al. 2011).
Noninvasive genetic capture-recapture using remotely collected hair samples from barbed-wire hair traps is a nearly ubiquitous method among bear (Ursidae) genetic and demographic studies (Belant et al. 2005;Garshelis 2006). The American black bear (Ursus americanus) is an ideal species to examine efficacy of noninvasive sampling designs when detection probability is variable, particularly at large landscape-level spatial scales (Settlage et al. 2008;Wilton et al. 2014a). Black bears persist at low densities often (Noyce and Garshelis 2011; Baldwin and Bender 2012), with large intra-and interpopulation variation in home range size (Koehler and Pierce 2003;Carter et al. 2010). The distribution of resources within a home range may mediate heterogeneous space use by black bears (Johnson 1980;Lyons et al. 2003) and differences in sex-specific space use and behavior are reflected often in unequal detection probabilities (Boulanger et al. 2004b;Belant et al. 2011). Temporal variation in hair-trapping success (e.g., seasonal molting) and individual encounter rate at hair traps (e.g., habituation, breeding behavior) also may influence detectability (Noyce et al. 2001;Wegan et al. 2012). Therefore, understanding how detection probability is influenced by variable space use at the home range scale and how hair deposition at hair traps is affected by temporal sampling frame is important for increasing sample size during hair trap capture-recapture studies.
Our objective was to improve our understanding of factors driving detection in noninvasive, capture-recapture sampling designs by estimating how a bear's distance to traps, probability of space use, sex-specific behavior, and temporal sampling frame affect detection probability and number of hair samples collected during a black bear DNA capture-recapture study (Wilton et al. 2014a). We predicted that detection probability would decrease following a negative asymptotic relationship as a bear's measured Global Positioning System (GPS) collar location to hair traps decreased and would be high when hair traps were located in areas of high probability of home range use. We also predicted that completion of molt and habituation to lures would cause number of hair samples collected to be inversely related to the temporal progression of sampling but positively related to frequency of bear visits to hair traps.

[SECTION] materials and methods
Study area.-We collected data from a colonizing black bear population in the Ozark Highlands region of south-central Missouri (Puckett et al. 2014;Wilton et al. 2014b). We estimated black bear density at 1.7 bears per 100 km 2 (95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.1-2.4- Wilton et al. 2014a). Dominant landcover types included forest (37%), crop and pasture (51%), grassland (2%), and developed areas (7%- Fry et al. 2011). About 80% of Missouri's 66,390 km 2 of forest is located in the Ozark Highlands ecological region and is primarily upland oak-hickory (Quercus spp., Carya spp.) and oak-pine (Pinus spp. -Raeker et al. 2010). Elevation in Missouri ranges from 70 to 540 m with highest elevations in the Ozark Highlands (Nigh and Schroeder 2002).
Data collection.-We collected black bear hair samples using barbed-wire hair traps (Woods et al. 1999) with scent lures as described by Wilton et al. (2014a). We constructed traps by stringing barbed wire around 3 or more trees at about 50 cm above ground to create an enclosure (~1.5 m radius) around the scent lures. In 2011, we used an array of 135, 10 × 10 km cells covering a total area of 13,500 km 2 . We distributed 378 hair traps proportionate to the number of historical (1989( -2010( -Wilton et al. 2014b) bear sightings per array cell following methods similar to Dreher et al. (2007) while attempting to maintain a minimum distance of 3 km between hair traps. In 2012, we established 403 hair traps in five 9 × 9 sampling arrays with 1 hair trap per 2.6 km 2 cell (210 km 2 /array; X = 81 traps/array, SD = 1). We also added a 2nd strand of barbed-wire at about 20 cm above ground.
In June-August each year, we re-lured hair traps every 10 days at the beginning of each of 6 consecutive sampling sessions and collected hair samples at the end of each session. We attempted to genotype all samples using 15 microsatellite loci following methods in Puckett et al. (2014). We allowed 2 mismatches between samples when evaluating recaptures (Creel et al. 2003) and genotyped each hair sample 3 times before assigning a consensus genotype. We determined sex for unique individuals by amplification of the amelogenin gene followed by BslI digestion (see Carmichael et al. 2005). Wilton et al. (2014a) and Puckett et al. (2014) provide a detailed description of field and DNA genotyping methods, respectively.
To estimate number of hair trap visits (see Number of visits) by black bears, we mounted 100 motion-sensitive infrared-triggered cameras (Cuddeback Attack IR and 4300 NoFlash, Green Bay, Wisconsin) each year at hair traps. We placed 1 camera per hair trap with each camera mounted 1-2 m above ground on a tree 5-10 m from a hair trap to capture the entire trap and immediate surroundings. All cameras recorded 1 still image and 1 30-s video with date and time per activation with a 1-min delay between events.
We captured bears using Aldrich foot snares outfitted with hood springs for cushioning and culvert traps (Johnson and Pelton 1980;Reagan et al. 2002) during 2010-2012. We immobilized bears with 7 mg/kg tiletamine-zolazepam (Telazol; A. H. Robins Company, Richmond, Virginia-Kreeger and Arnemo 2007) administered using a CO 2 -powered rifle or syringe pole (White et al. 1996). We recorded sex and collected hair and tissue (biopsy from ear tagging) samples for microsatellite genotyping. We fitted all bears with GPS collars (Northstar NSG-LD2, RASSL Globalstar, King George, Virginia) programmed to collect 1 location every 10 min during our hair trap sampling period. Accuracy of GPS collar locations was estimated by the manufacturer to be within 5 m for > 95% of locations. All capture and handling complied with the American Society of Mammalogists guidelines (Sikes et al. 2011) and was approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee protocol (approval 10-037) at Mississippi State University.
Probability of use and encounter rate.-We made a database containing the genotypes of GPS-collared bears that were matched with genotypes from hair samples collected at hair traps to create an individual-specific database of collared bears detected and not detected at hair traps during each sampling session. To examine the influence of home range space use, bear proximity to hair traps, and sex on detection probability, we modeled 3 covariates to predict the probability of detecting a bear at a hair trap.
We estimated 95% fixed kernel utilization distributions (UDs- Millspaugh et al. 2006;Powell and Mitchell 2012) using function bkde2D in package KernSmooth (version 2.23-10-Wand 2014) in program R (R Development Core Team 2013) to evaluate the relative probability of use across hair trap locations within GPS-collared bear home ranges. Because of variation in percentage of successful GPS telemetry locations among bears, we randomly subsampled 1 location per day for each bear during each year's sampling period (60 days) for bears with ≥ 30 locations. We used the standard bivariate normal density kernel and the plug-in bandwidth estimator (Gitzen et al. 2006). We fixed cell size at 100 × 100 m for all collared bears and each cell was assigned a relative probability of use (UD score). To standardize values among bears, we scaled each bear's UD scores between 0 and 1, where 1 represents the greatest relative probability of use. For each bear, we then retained only those UD scores for cells containing a hair trap for analysis.
Using a geographic information system (ESRI 2012), we calculated the nearest per session distance collared bears approached each hair trap located within their 95% UD and then matched these distances with each detection/non-detection at hair traps. We used all possible locations per bear and excluded individuals when the shortest relocation interval was > 24 h to meet our subsampling procedure. Since a bear's nearest measured GPS distance to a hair trap depends on the number of recorded GPS locations, we used the Breusch-Pagan (BP) test (Breusch and Pagan 1979) for heteroscedasticity (function BP test- Zeileis and Hothorn 2002) in program R to test for an effect of the number of GPS telemetry locations per session against nearest distance to hair traps. To achieve equal variances in the probability of use and encounter rate regression analysis, we excluded sessions that had a sample size smaller than the minimum required to achieve homoscedasticity. We also truncated the data at the distance that included 100% of detections to exclude distances having a negligible probability of detection (i.e., distances beyond the farthest distance that was associated with a detection were excluded).
We used a binomial generalized linear mixed model (GLMM; function glmer) in package lme4 (version 1.0-5- Bates et al. 2013) in program R, specifying individual detection at hair traps as a binary response variable (1 = detection, 0 = non-detection) and UD score (UD), nearest distance to hair trap (dist), and sex as fixed effects predicting the probability of collecting an individual's hair sample (i.e., detection) at a hair trap during each sampling session. Following Boulanger et al. (2004b), the y-intercept at 0 m to a hair trap estimates the probability of detecting a bear when the hair trap was encountered (i.e., estimated 0 m from hair trap), assuming that GPS-collared bears were a representative sample of the population. We centered (X = 0) and scaled (SD = 1) UD scores and distances to hair trap to allow equal weight among predictor variables. Since all predictor variables could independently influence detection, we ran all fixed effect combinations as main effects. We included yearspecific individual bear identification as a random intercept to account for variation among bears and sampling years.
We used sample size corrected Akaike information criterion (AIC c ) to rank model support and considered models competing if within 2 AIC c units from the most parsimonious model (Burnham and Anderson 2002). We interpreted beta parameters of each competing model to determine the best approximation of detection probability and considered the influence of parameters if 95% CIs excluded 0 (Blums et al. 2005).
Number of visits.-We counted the number of independent bear visits to hair traps per sampling session, where a remote camera image of a bear at a hair trap constitutes a visit. We considered visits as independent if the interval between pictures at the same hair trap site was ≥ 30 min or if bears could be individually distinguished (Kinnaird et al. 2003;Bowkett et al. 2008). We tested for a temporal relationship between the number of hair samples collected and number of independent bear visits from images at hair traps across sampling sessions. We specified the number of hair samples as the response variable and number of bear visits and sampling session as fixed effects. We centered and scaled number of visits and sampling session. We initially included year as a random effect, but an estimate of 0 variance indicated that the variability between sampling years was not greater than expected by random variation in the response variable (Bolker et al. 2009). Therefore, we fit a Poisson generalized linear model (GLM; function glm) in package lme4. We ran all possible fixed effect combinations (n = 5), including interaction effects between session and number of visits. We tested for overdispersion under the null hypothesis of equidispersion and rejected the null if the dispersion parameter (ĉ) was greater than 1 (function dispersion test-Kleiber and Zeileis 2008). Model selection followed the same criteria as for the encounter rate analysis.

